From fairest creatures we desire increase, xxxnewlinexxx That thereby beauty's rose might never die, xxxnewlinexxx But as the riper should by time decease, xxxnewlinexxx His tender heir might bear his memory: xxxnewlinexxx But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes, xxxnewlinexxx Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel, xxxnewlinexxx Making a famine where abundance lies, xxxnewlinexxx Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel: xxxnewlinexxx Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament, xxxnewlinexxx And only herald to the gaudy spring, xxxnewlinexxx Within thine own bud buriest thy content, xxxnewlinexxx And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding: xxxnewlinexxx   Pity the world, or else this glutton be, xxxnewlinexxx   To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee. xxxendxxx
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow, xxxnewlinexxx And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field, xxxnewlinexxx Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now, xxxnewlinexxx Will be a tatter'd weed of small worth held:  xxxnewlinexxx Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies, xxxnewlinexxx Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;  xxxnewlinexxx To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes, xxxnewlinexxx Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise. xxxnewlinexxx How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use, xxxnewlinexxx If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine xxxnewlinexxx Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,' xxxnewlinexxx Proving his beauty by succession thine! xxxnewlinexxx   This were to be new made when thou art old, xxxnewlinexxx   And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold. xxxendxxx
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest xxxnewlinexxx Now is the time that face should form another; xxxnewlinexxx Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest, xxxnewlinexxx Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother. xxxnewlinexxx For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb xxxnewlinexxx Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry? xxxnewlinexxx Or who is he so fond will be the tomb, xxxnewlinexxx Of his self-love to stop posterity?  xxxnewlinexxx Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee xxxnewlinexxx Calls back the lovely April of her prime; xxxnewlinexxx So thou through windows of thine age shalt see, xxxnewlinexxx Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time. xxxnewlinexxx   But if thou live, remember'd not to be, xxxnewlinexxx   Die single and thine image dies with thee. xxxendxxx
Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend xxxnewlinexxx Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy? xxxnewlinexxx Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend, xxxnewlinexxx And being frank she lends to those are free: xxxnewlinexxx Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse xxxnewlinexxx The bounteous largess given thee to give? xxxnewlinexxx Profitless usurer, why dost thou use xxxnewlinexxx So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live? xxxnewlinexxx For having traffic with thy self alone, xxxnewlinexxx Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive: xxxnewlinexxx Then how when nature calls thee to be gone, xxxnewlinexxx What acceptable audit canst thou leave? xxxnewlinexxx   Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee, xxxnewlinexxx   Which, used, lives th' executor to be. xxxendxxx
Those hours, that with gentle work did frame xxxnewlinexxx The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell, xxxnewlinexxx Will play the tyrants to the very same xxxnewlinexxx And that unfair which fairly doth excel; xxxnewlinexxx For never-resting time leads summer on xxxnewlinexxx To hideous winter, and confounds him there; xxxnewlinexxx Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone, xxxnewlinexxx Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where: xxxnewlinexxx Then were not summer's distillation left, xxxnewlinexxx A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass, xxxnewlinexxx Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft, xxxnewlinexxx Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was: xxxnewlinexxx   But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet, xxxnewlinexxx   Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet. xxxnewlinexxx  xxxendxxx
Then let not winter's ragged hand deface, xxxnewlinexxx In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd: xxxnewlinexxx Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place xxxnewlinexxx With beauty's treasure ere it be self-kill'd. xxxnewlinexxx That use is not forbidden usury, xxxnewlinexxx Which happies those that pay the willing loan; xxxnewlinexxx That's for thy self to breed another thee, xxxnewlinexxx Or ten times happier, be it ten for one; xxxnewlinexxx Ten times thy self were happier than thou art, xxxnewlinexxx If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee: xxxnewlinexxx Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart, xxxnewlinexxx Leaving thee living in posterity? xxxnewlinexxx   Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair xxxnewlinexxx   To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir. xxxendxxx
Lo! in the orient when the gracious light xxxnewlinexxx Lifts up his burning head, each under eye xxxnewlinexxx Doth homage to his new-appearing sight, xxxnewlinexxx Serving with looks his sacred majesty;  xxxnewlinexxx And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill, xxxnewlinexxx Resembling strong youth in his middle age, xxxnewlinexxx Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still, xxxnewlinexxx Attending on his golden pilgrimage: xxxnewlinexxx But when from highmost pitch, with weary car, xxxnewlinexxx Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day, xxxnewlinexxx The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are xxxnewlinexxx From his low tract, and look another way: xxxnewlinexxx   So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon: xxxnewlinexxx   Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son. xxxendxxx
Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly? xxxnewlinexxx Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy: xxxnewlinexxx Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly, xxxnewlinexxx Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy? xxxnewlinexxx If the true concord of well-tuned sounds, xxxnewlinexxx By unions married, do offend thine ear, xxxnewlinexxx They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds xxxnewlinexxx In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.  xxxnewlinexxx Mark how one string, sweet husband to another, xxxnewlinexxx Strikes each in each by mutual ordering; xxxnewlinexxx Resembling sire and child and happy mother, xxxnewlinexxx Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing: xxxnewlinexxx   Whose speechless song being many, seeming one, xxxnewlinexxx   Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.' xxxendxxx
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye, xxxnewlinexxx That thou consum'st thy self in single life? xxxnewlinexxx Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die, xxxnewlinexxx The world will wail thee like a makeless wife; xxxnewlinexxx The world will be thy widow and still weep xxxnewlinexxx That thou no form of thee hast left behind, xxxnewlinexxx When every private widow well may keep xxxnewlinexxx By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind: xxxnewlinexxx Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend xxxnewlinexxx Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it; xxxnewlinexxx But beauty's waste hath in the world an end, xxxnewlinexxx And kept unused the user so destroys it. xxxnewlinexxx   No love toward others in that bosom sits xxxnewlinexxx   That on himself such murd'rous shame commits. xxxendxxx
For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any, xxxnewlinexxx Who for thy self art so unprovident. xxxnewlinexxx Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many, xxxnewlinexxx But that thou none lov'st is most evident: xxxnewlinexxx For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate, xxxnewlinexxx That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire, xxxnewlinexxx Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate xxxnewlinexxx Which to repair should be thy chief desire. xxxnewlinexxx O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind: xxxnewlinexxx Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love? xxxnewlinexxx Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind, xxxnewlinexxx Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove: xxxnewlinexxx   Make thee another self for love of me, xxxnewlinexxx   That beauty still may live in thine or thee. xxxendxxx
As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st, xxxnewlinexxx In one of thine, from that which thou departest; xxxnewlinexxx And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st, xxxnewlinexxx Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest, xxxnewlinexxx Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase; xxxnewlinexxx Without this folly, age, and cold decay: xxxnewlinexxx If all were minded so, the times should cease xxxnewlinexxx And threescore year would make the world away. xxxnewlinexxx Let those whom nature hath not made for store, xxxnewlinexxx Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish: xxxnewlinexxx Look, whom she best endow'd, she gave thee more; xxxnewlinexxx Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish: xxxnewlinexxx   She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby, xxxnewlinexxx   Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die. xxxendxxx
When I do count the clock that tells the time, xxxnewlinexxx And see the brave day sunk in hideous night; xxxnewlinexxx When I behold the violet past prime, xxxnewlinexxx And sable curls, all silvered o'er with white;  xxxnewlinexxx When lofty trees I see barren of leaves, xxxnewlinexxx Which erst from heat did canopy the herd, xxxnewlinexxx And summer's green all girded up in sheaves, xxxnewlinexxx Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard, xxxnewlinexxx Then of thy beauty do I question make, xxxnewlinexxx That thou among the wastes of time must go, xxxnewlinexxx Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake xxxnewlinexxx And die as fast as they see others grow; xxxnewlinexxx   And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence xxxnewlinexxx   Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence. xxxendxxx
O! that you were your self; but, love you are xxxnewlinexxx No longer yours, than you your self here live: xxxnewlinexxx Against this coming end you should prepare, xxxnewlinexxx And your sweet semblance to some other give: xxxnewlinexxx So should that beauty which you hold in lease xxxnewlinexxx Find no determination; then you were xxxnewlinexxx Yourself again, after yourself's decease, xxxnewlinexxx When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.  xxxnewlinexxx Who lets so fair a house fall to decay, xxxnewlinexxx Which husbandry in honour might uphold, xxxnewlinexxx Against the stormy gusts of winter's day xxxnewlinexxx And barren rage of death's eternal cold? xxxnewlinexxx   O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know, xxxnewlinexxx   You had a father: let your son say so. xxxendxxx
Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck; xxxnewlinexxx And yet methinks I have astronomy, xxxnewlinexxx But not to tell of good or evil luck, xxxnewlinexxx Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality; xxxnewlinexxx Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell, xxxnewlinexxx Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind, xxxnewlinexxx Or say with princes if it shall go well xxxnewlinexxx By oft predict that I in heaven find: xxxnewlinexxx But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive, xxxnewlinexxx And constant stars in them I read such art xxxnewlinexxx As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive, xxxnewlinexxx If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert';  xxxnewlinexxx   Or else of thee this I prognosticate: xxxnewlinexxx   'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.' xxxendxxx
When I consider every thing that grows xxxnewlinexxx Holds in perfection but a little moment, xxxnewlinexxx That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows xxxnewlinexxx Whereon the stars in secret influence comment; xxxnewlinexxx When I perceive that men as plants increase, xxxnewlinexxx Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky, xxxnewlinexxx Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease, xxxnewlinexxx And wear their brave state out of memory; xxxnewlinexxx Then the conceit of this inconstant stay xxxnewlinexxx Sets you most rich in youth before my sight, xxxnewlinexxx Where wasteful Time debateth with decay xxxnewlinexxx To change your day of youth to sullied night, xxxnewlinexxx   And all in war with Time for love of you, xxxnewlinexxx   As he takes from you, I engraft you new. xxxendxxx
But wherefore do not you a mightier way xxxnewlinexxx Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time? xxxnewlinexxx And fortify your self in your decay xxxnewlinexxx With means more blessed than my barren rhyme? xxxnewlinexxx Now stand you on the top of happy hours, xxxnewlinexxx And many maiden gardens, yet unset, xxxnewlinexxx With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers, xxxnewlinexxx Much liker than your painted counterfeit: xxxnewlinexxx So should the lines of life that life repair, xxxnewlinexxx Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen, xxxnewlinexxx Neither in inward worth nor outward fair, xxxnewlinexxx Can make you live your self in eyes of men. xxxnewlinexxx   To give away yourself, keeps yourself still, xxxnewlinexxx   And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill. xxxendxxx
Who will believe my verse in time to come, xxxnewlinexxx If it were fill'd with your most high deserts? xxxnewlinexxx Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb xxxnewlinexxx Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts.  xxxnewlinexxx If I could write the beauty of your eyes, xxxnewlinexxx And in fresh numbers number all your graces, xxxnewlinexxx The age to come would say 'This poet lies; xxxnewlinexxx Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.' xxxnewlinexxx So should my papers, yellow'd with their age, xxxnewlinexxx Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue, xxxnewlinexxx And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage xxxnewlinexxx And stretched metre of an antique song: xxxnewlinexxx   But were some child of yours alive that time, xxxnewlinexxx   You should live twice,--in it, and in my rhyme. xxxendxxx
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? xxxnewlinexxx Thou art more lovely and more temperate: xxxnewlinexxx Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, xxxnewlinexxx And summer's lease hath all too short a date: xxxnewlinexxx Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, xxxnewlinexxx And often is his gold complexion dimm'd, xxxnewlinexxx And every fair from fair sometime declines, xxxnewlinexxx By chance, or nature's changing course untrimm'd:  xxxnewlinexxx But thy eternal summer shall not fade, xxxnewlinexxx Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st, xxxnewlinexxx Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade, xxxnewlinexxx When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st, xxxnewlinexxx   So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see, xxxnewlinexxx   So long lives this, and this gives life to thee. xxxendxxx
Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws, xxxnewlinexxx And make the earth devour her own sweet brood; xxxnewlinexxx Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws, xxxnewlinexxx And burn the long-liv'd phoenix, in her blood; xxxnewlinexxx Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets, xxxnewlinexxx And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time, xxxnewlinexxx To the wide world and all her fading sweets; xxxnewlinexxx But I forbid thee one most heinous crime: xxxnewlinexxx O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow, xxxnewlinexxx Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen; xxxnewlinexxx Him in thy course untainted do allow xxxnewlinexxx For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.  xxxnewlinexxx   Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong, xxxnewlinexxx   My love shall in my verse ever live young. xxxendxxx
A woman's face with nature's own hand painted, xxxnewlinexxx Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion; xxxnewlinexxx A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted xxxnewlinexxx With shifting change, as is false women's fashion: xxxnewlinexxx An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling, xxxnewlinexxx Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth; xxxnewlinexxx A man in hue all 'hues' in his controlling, xxxnewlinexxx Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth. xxxnewlinexxx And for a woman wert thou first created; xxxnewlinexxx Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting, xxxnewlinexxx And by addition me of thee defeated, xxxnewlinexxx By adding one thing to my purpose nothing. xxxnewlinexxx   But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure, xxxnewlinexxx   Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure. xxxendxxx
So is it not with me as with that Muse, xxxnewlinexxx Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse, xxxnewlinexxx Who heaven itself for ornament doth use xxxnewlinexxx And every fair with his fair doth rehearse, xxxnewlinexxx Making a couplement of proud compare' xxxnewlinexxx With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems, xxxnewlinexxx With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare, xxxnewlinexxx That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems. xxxnewlinexxx O! let me, true in love, but truly write, xxxnewlinexxx And then believe me, my love is as fair xxxnewlinexxx As any mother's child, though not so bright xxxnewlinexxx As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air: xxxnewlinexxx   Let them say more that like of hearsay well; xxxnewlinexxx   I will not praise that purpose not to sell. xxxendxxx
My glass shall not persuade me I am old, xxxnewlinexxx So long as youth and thou are of one date; xxxnewlinexxx But when in thee time's furrows I behold, xxxnewlinexxx Then look I death my days should expiate.  xxxnewlinexxx For all that beauty that doth cover thee, xxxnewlinexxx Is but the seemly raiment of my heart, xxxnewlinexxx Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me: xxxnewlinexxx How can I then be elder than thou art? xxxnewlinexxx O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary xxxnewlinexxx As I, not for myself, but for thee will; xxxnewlinexxx Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary xxxnewlinexxx As tender nurse her babe from faring ill. xxxnewlinexxx   Presume not on th;heart when mine is slain, xxxnewlinexxx   Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again. xxxendxxx
As an unperfect actor on the stage, xxxnewlinexxx Who with his fear is put beside his part, xxxnewlinexxx Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage, xxxnewlinexxx Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart; xxxnewlinexxx So I, for fear of trust, forget to say xxxnewlinexxx The perfect ceremony of love's rite, xxxnewlinexxx And in mine own love's strength seem to decay, xxxnewlinexxx O'ercharg'd with burthen of mine own love's might.  xxxnewlinexxx O! let my looks be then the eloquence xxxnewlinexxx And dumb presagers of my speaking breast, xxxnewlinexxx Who plead for love, and look for recompense, xxxnewlinexxx More than that tongue that more hath more express'd. xxxnewlinexxx   O! learn to read what silent love hath writ: xxxnewlinexxx   To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit. xxxendxxx
Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd, xxxnewlinexxx Thy beauty's form in table of my heart; xxxnewlinexxx My body is the frame wherein 'tis held, xxxnewlinexxx And perspective it is best painter's art. xxxnewlinexxx For through the painter must you see his skill, xxxnewlinexxx To find where your true image pictur'd lies, xxxnewlinexxx Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still, xxxnewlinexxx That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes. xxxnewlinexxx Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done: xxxnewlinexxx Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me xxxnewlinexxx Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun xxxnewlinexxx Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;  xxxnewlinexxx   Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art, xxxnewlinexxx   They draw but what they see, know not the heart. xxxendxxx
Let those who are in favour with their stars xxxnewlinexxx Of public honour and proud titles boast, xxxnewlinexxx Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars xxxnewlinexxx Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most. xxxnewlinexxx Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread xxxnewlinexxx But as the marigold at the sun's eye, xxxnewlinexxx And in themselves their pride lies buried, xxxnewlinexxx For at a frown they in their glory die. xxxnewlinexxx The painful warrior famoused for fight, xxxnewlinexxx After a thousand victories once foil'd, xxxnewlinexxx Is from the book of honour razed quite, xxxnewlinexxx And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd: xxxnewlinexxx Then happy I, that love and am belov'd, xxxnewlinexxx Where I may not remove nor be remov'd. xxxendxxx
Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage xxxnewlinexxx Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit, xxxnewlinexxx To thee I send this written embassage, xxxnewlinexxx To witness duty, not to show my wit: xxxnewlinexxx Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine xxxnewlinexxx May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it, xxxnewlinexxx But that I hope some good conceit of thine xxxnewlinexxx In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it: xxxnewlinexxx Till whatsoever star that guides my moving, xxxnewlinexxx Points on me graciously with fair aspect, xxxnewlinexxx And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving, xxxnewlinexxx To show me worthy of thy sweet respect: xxxnewlinexxx   Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee; xxxnewlinexxx   Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me. xxxendxxx
Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed, xxxnewlinexxx The dear respose for limbs with travel tir'd; xxxnewlinexxx But then begins a journey in my head xxxnewlinexxx To work my mind, when body's work's expired:  xxxnewlinexxx For then my thoughts--from far where I abide-- xxxnewlinexxx Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee, xxxnewlinexxx And keep my drooping eyelids open wide, xxxnewlinexxx Looking on darkness which the blind do see: xxxnewlinexxx Save that my soul's imaginary sight xxxnewlinexxx Presents thy shadow to my sightless view, xxxnewlinexxx Which, like a jewel (hung in ghastly night, xxxnewlinexxx Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new. xxxnewlinexxx   Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind, xxxnewlinexxx   For thee, and for myself, no quiet find. xxxendxxx
How can I then return in happy plight, xxxnewlinexxx That am debarre'd the benefit of rest? xxxnewlinexxx When day's oppression is not eas'd by night, xxxnewlinexxx But day by night and night by day oppress'd, xxxnewlinexxx And each, though enemies to either's reign, xxxnewlinexxx Do in consent shake hands to torture me, xxxnewlinexxx The one by toil, the other to complain xxxnewlinexxx How far I toil, still farther off from thee.  xxxnewlinexxx I tell the day, to please him thou art bright, xxxnewlinexxx And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven: xxxnewlinexxx So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night, xxxnewlinexxx When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even. xxxnewlinexxx   But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer, xxxnewlinexxx   And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger. xxxendxxx
When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes xxxnewlinexxx I all alone beweep my outcast state, xxxnewlinexxx And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries, xxxnewlinexxx And look upon myself, and curse my fate, xxxnewlinexxx Wishing me like to one more rich in hope, xxxnewlinexxx Featur'd like him, like him with friends possess'd, xxxnewlinexxx Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope, xxxnewlinexxx With what I most enjoy contented least; xxxnewlinexxx Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising, xxxnewlinexxx Haply I think on thee,-- and then my state, xxxnewlinexxx Like to the lark at break of day arising xxxnewlinexxx From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate,; xxxnewlinexxx   For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings xxxnewlinexxx   That then I scorn to change my state with kings. xxxendxxx
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought xxxnewlinexxx I summon up remembrance of things past, xxxnewlinexxx I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought, xxxnewlinexxx And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste: xxxnewlinexxx Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow, xxxnewlinexxx For precious friends hid in death's dateless night, xxxnewlinexxx And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe, xxxnewlinexxx And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight: xxxnewlinexxx Then can I grieve at grievances foregone, xxxnewlinexxx And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er xxxnewlinexxx The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan, xxxnewlinexxx Which I new pay as if not paid before. xxxnewlinexxx   But if the while I think on thee, dear friend, xxxnewlinexxx   All losses are restor'd and sorrows end. xxxendxxx
Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts, xxxnewlinexxx Which I by lacking have supposed dead; xxxnewlinexxx And there reigns Love, and all Love's loving parts, xxxnewlinexxx And all those friends which I thought buried. xxxnewlinexxx How many a holy and obsequious tear xxxnewlinexxx Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye, xxxnewlinexxx As interest of the dead, which now appear xxxnewlinexxx But things remov'd that hidden in thee lie! xxxnewlinexxx Thou art the grave where buried love doth live, xxxnewlinexxx Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone, xxxnewlinexxx Who all their parts of me to thee did give, xxxnewlinexxx That due of many now is thine alone: xxxnewlinexxx   Their images I lov'd, I view in thee, xxxnewlinexxx   And thou--all they--hast all the all of me. xxxendxxx
If thou survive my well-contented day, xxxnewlinexxx When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover xxxnewlinexxx And shalt by fortune once more re-survey xxxnewlinexxx These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover, xxxnewlinexxx Compare them with the bett'ring of the time, xxxnewlinexxx And though they be outstripp'd by every pen, xxxnewlinexxx Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme, xxxnewlinexxx Exceeded by the height of happier men. xxxnewlinexxx O! then vouchsafe me but this loving thought: xxxnewlinexxx 'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age, xxxnewlinexxx A dearer birth than this his love had brought, xxxnewlinexxx To march in ranks of better equipage: xxxnewlinexxx   But since he died and poets better prove, xxxnewlinexxx   Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'. xxxendxxx
Full many a glorious morning have I seen xxxnewlinexxx Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye, xxxnewlinexxx Kissing with golden face the meadows green, xxxnewlinexxx Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy; xxxnewlinexxx Anon permit the basest clouds to ride xxxnewlinexxx With ugly rack on his celestial face, xxxnewlinexxx And from the forlorn world his visage hide, xxxnewlinexxx Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:  xxxnewlinexxx Even so my sun one early morn did shine, xxxnewlinexxx With all triumphant splendour on my brow; xxxnewlinexxx But out! alack! he was but one hour mine, xxxnewlinexxx The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now. xxxnewlinexxx   Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth; xxxnewlinexxx   Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth. xxxendxxx
Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day, xxxnewlinexxx And make me travel forth without my cloak, xxxnewlinexxx To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way, xxxnewlinexxx Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke? xxxnewlinexxx 'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break, xxxnewlinexxx To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face, xxxnewlinexxx For no man well of such a salve can speak, xxxnewlinexxx That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace: xxxnewlinexxx Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief; xxxnewlinexxx Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss: xxxnewlinexxx The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief xxxnewlinexxx To him that bears the strong offence's cross.  xxxnewlinexxx   Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds, xxxnewlinexxx   And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds. xxxendxxx
No more be griev'd at that which thou hast done: xxxnewlinexxx Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud: xxxnewlinexxx Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun, xxxnewlinexxx And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud. xxxnewlinexxx All men make faults, and even I in this, xxxnewlinexxx Authorizing thy trespass with compare, xxxnewlinexxx Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss, xxxnewlinexxx Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are; xxxnewlinexxx For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,-- xxxnewlinexxx Thy adverse party is thy advocate,-- xxxnewlinexxx And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence: xxxnewlinexxx Such civil war is in my love and hate, xxxnewlinexxx   That I an accessary needs must be, xxxnewlinexxx   To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me. xxxendxxx
Let me confess that we two must be twain, xxxnewlinexxx Although our undivided loves are one: xxxnewlinexxx So shall those blots that do with me remain, xxxnewlinexxx Without thy help, by me be borne alone. xxxnewlinexxx In our two loves there is but one respect, xxxnewlinexxx Though in our lives a separable spite, xxxnewlinexxx Which though it alter not love's sole effect, xxxnewlinexxx Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight. xxxnewlinexxx I may not evermore acknowledge thee, xxxnewlinexxx Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame, xxxnewlinexxx Nor thou with public kindness honour me, xxxnewlinexxx Unless thou take that honour from thy name: xxxnewlinexxx   But do not so, I love thee in such sort, xxxnewlinexxx   As thou being mine, mine is thy good report. xxxendxxx
As a decrepit father takes delight xxxnewlinexxx To see his active child do deeds of youth, xxxnewlinexxx So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite, xxxnewlinexxx Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth;  xxxnewlinexxx For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit, xxxnewlinexxx Or any of these all, or all, or more, xxxnewlinexxx Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit, xxxnewlinexxx I make my love engrafted, to this store: xxxnewlinexxx So then I am not lame, poor, nor despis'd, xxxnewlinexxx Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give xxxnewlinexxx That I in thy abundance am suffic'd, xxxnewlinexxx And by a part of all thy glory live. xxxnewlinexxx   Look what is best, that best I wish in thee: xxxnewlinexxx   This wish I have; then ten times happy me! xxxendxxx
How can my muse want subject to invent, xxxnewlinexxx While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse xxxnewlinexxx Thine own sweet argument, too excellent xxxnewlinexxx For every vulgar paper to rehearse? xxxnewlinexxx O! give thy self the thanks, if aught in me xxxnewlinexxx Worthy perusal stand against thy sight; xxxnewlinexxx For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee, xxxnewlinexxx When thou thy self dost give invention light?  xxxnewlinexxx Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth xxxnewlinexxx Than those old nine which rhymers invocate; xxxnewlinexxx And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth xxxnewlinexxx Eternal numbers to outlive long date. xxxnewlinexxx   If my slight muse do please these curious days, xxxnewlinexxx   The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise. xxxendxxx
O! how thy worth with manners may I sing, xxxnewlinexxx When thou art all the better part of me? xxxnewlinexxx What can mine own praise to mine own self bring? xxxnewlinexxx And what is't but mine own when I praise thee? xxxnewlinexxx Even for this, let us divided live, xxxnewlinexxx And our dear love lose name of single one, xxxnewlinexxx That by this separation I may give xxxnewlinexxx That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone. xxxnewlinexxx O absence! what a torment wouldst thou prove, xxxnewlinexxx Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave, xxxnewlinexxx To entertain the time with thoughts of love, xxxnewlinexxx Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,  xxxnewlinexxx   And that thou teachest how to make one twain, xxxnewlinexxx   By praising him here who doth hence remain. xxxendxxx
Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all; xxxnewlinexxx What hast thou then more than thou hadst before? xxxnewlinexxx No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call; xxxnewlinexxx All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more. xxxnewlinexxx Then, if for my love, thou my love receivest, xxxnewlinexxx I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest; xxxnewlinexxx But yet be blam'd, if thou thy self deceivest xxxnewlinexxx By wilful taste of what thyself refusest. xxxnewlinexxx I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief, xxxnewlinexxx Although thou steal thee all my poverty: xxxnewlinexxx And yet, love knows it is a greater grief xxxnewlinexxx To bear love's wrong, than hate's known injury. xxxnewlinexxx   Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows, xxxnewlinexxx   Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes. xxxendxxx
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits, xxxnewlinexxx When I am sometime absent from thy heart, xxxnewlinexxx Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits, xxxnewlinexxx For still temptation follows where thou art. xxxnewlinexxx Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won, xxxnewlinexxx Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assail'd; xxxnewlinexxx And when a woman woos, what woman's son xxxnewlinexxx Will sourly leave her till he have prevail'd? xxxnewlinexxx Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear, xxxnewlinexxx And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth, xxxnewlinexxx Who lead thee in their riot even there xxxnewlinexxx Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:-- xxxnewlinexxx   Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee, xxxnewlinexxx   Thine by thy beauty being false to me. xxxendxxx
That thou hast her it is not all my grief, xxxnewlinexxx And yet it may be said I loved her dearly; xxxnewlinexxx That she hath thee is of my wailing chief, xxxnewlinexxx A loss in love that touches me more nearly.  xxxnewlinexxx Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye: xxxnewlinexxx Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her; xxxnewlinexxx And for my sake even so doth she abuse me, xxxnewlinexxx Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her. xxxnewlinexxx If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain, xxxnewlinexxx And losing her, my friend hath found that loss; xxxnewlinexxx Both find each other, and I lose both twain, xxxnewlinexxx And both for my sake lay on me this cross: xxxnewlinexxx   But here's the joy; my friend and I are one; xxxnewlinexxx   Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone. xxxendxxx
When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see, xxxnewlinexxx For all the day they view things unrespected; xxxnewlinexxx But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee, xxxnewlinexxx And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed. xxxnewlinexxx Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright, xxxnewlinexxx How would thy shadow's form form happy show xxxnewlinexxx To the clear day with thy much clearer light, xxxnewlinexxx When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!  xxxnewlinexxx How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made xxxnewlinexxx By looking on thee in the living day, xxxnewlinexxx When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade xxxnewlinexxx Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay! xxxnewlinexxx   All days are nights to see till I see thee, xxxnewlinexxx   And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me. xxxendxxx
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought, xxxnewlinexxx Injurious distance should not stop my way; xxxnewlinexxx For then despite of space I would be brought, xxxnewlinexxx From limits far remote, where thou dost stay. xxxnewlinexxx No matter then although my foot did stand xxxnewlinexxx Upon the farthest earth remov'd from thee; xxxnewlinexxx For nimble thought can jump both sea and land, xxxnewlinexxx As soon as think the place where he would be. xxxnewlinexxx But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought, xxxnewlinexxx To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone, xxxnewlinexxx But that so much of earth and water wrought, xxxnewlinexxx I must attend, time's leisure with my moan; xxxnewlinexxx   Receiving nought by elements so slow xxxnewlinexxx   But heavy tears, badges of either's woe. xxxendxxx
The other two, slight air, and purging fire xxxnewlinexxx Are both with thee, wherever I abide; xxxnewlinexxx The first my thought, the other my desire, xxxnewlinexxx These present-absent with swift motion slide. xxxnewlinexxx For when these quicker elements are gone xxxnewlinexxx In tender embassy of love to thee, xxxnewlinexxx My life, being made of four, with two alone xxxnewlinexxx Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy; xxxnewlinexxx Until life's composition be recur'd xxxnewlinexxx By those swift messengers return'd from thee, xxxnewlinexxx Who even but now come back again, assur'd, xxxnewlinexxx Of thy fair health, recounting it to me: xxxnewlinexxx   This told, I joy; but then no longer glad, xxxnewlinexxx   I send them back again, and straight grow sad. xxxendxxx
Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war, xxxnewlinexxx How to divide the conquest of thy sight; xxxnewlinexxx Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar, xxxnewlinexxx My heart mine eye the freedom of that right. xxxnewlinexxx My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,-- xxxnewlinexxx A closet never pierc'd with crystal eyes-- xxxnewlinexxx But the defendant doth that plea deny, xxxnewlinexxx And says in him thy fair appearance lies. xxxnewlinexxx To side this title is impannelled xxxnewlinexxx A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart; xxxnewlinexxx And by their verdict is determined xxxnewlinexxx The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part: xxxnewlinexxx   As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part, xxxnewlinexxx   And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart. xxxendxxx
Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took, xxxnewlinexxx And each doth good turns now unto the other: xxxnewlinexxx When that mine eye is famish'd for a look, xxxnewlinexxx Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother, xxxnewlinexxx With my love's picture then my eye doth feast, xxxnewlinexxx And to the painted banquet bids my heart; xxxnewlinexxx Another time mine eye is my heart's guest, xxxnewlinexxx And in his thoughts of love doth share a part: xxxnewlinexxx So, either by thy picture or my love, xxxnewlinexxx Thy self away, art present still with me; xxxnewlinexxx For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move, xxxnewlinexxx And I am still with them, and they with thee; xxxnewlinexxx   Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight xxxnewlinexxx   Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight. xxxendxxx
How careful was I when I took my way, xxxnewlinexxx Each trifle under truest bars to thrust, xxxnewlinexxx That to my use it might unused stay xxxnewlinexxx From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust! xxxnewlinexxx But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are, xxxnewlinexxx Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief, xxxnewlinexxx Thou best of dearest, and mine only care, xxxnewlinexxx Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.  xxxnewlinexxx Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest, xxxnewlinexxx Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art, xxxnewlinexxx Within the gentle closure of my breast, xxxnewlinexxx From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part; xxxnewlinexxx   And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear, xxxnewlinexxx   For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear. xxxendxxx
Against that time, if ever that time come, xxxnewlinexxx When I shall see thee frown on my defects, xxxnewlinexxx When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum, xxxnewlinexxx Call'd to that audit by advis'd respects; xxxnewlinexxx Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass, xxxnewlinexxx And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye, xxxnewlinexxx When love, converted from the thing it was, xxxnewlinexxx Shall reasons find of settled gravity; xxxnewlinexxx Against that time do I ensconce me here, xxxnewlinexxx Within the knowledge of mine own desert, xxxnewlinexxx And this my hand, against my self uprear, xxxnewlinexxx To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:  xxxnewlinexxx   To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws, xxxnewlinexxx   Since why to love I can allege no cause. xxxendxxx
How heavy do I journey on the way, xxxnewlinexxx When what I seek, my weary travel's end, xxxnewlinexxx Doth teach that ease and that repose to say, xxxnewlinexxx 'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!' xxxnewlinexxx The beast that bears me, tired with my woe, xxxnewlinexxx Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me, xxxnewlinexxx As if by some instinct the wretch did know xxxnewlinexxx His rider lov'd not speed, being made from thee: xxxnewlinexxx The bloody spur cannot provoke him on, xxxnewlinexxx That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide, xxxnewlinexxx Which heavily he answers with a groan, xxxnewlinexxx More sharp to me than spurring to his side; xxxnewlinexxx   For that same groan doth put this in my mind, xxxnewlinexxx   My grief lies onward, and my joy behind. xxxendxxx
Thus can my love excuse the slow offence xxxnewlinexxx Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed: xxxnewlinexxx From where thou art why should I haste me thence? xxxnewlinexxx Till I return, of posting is no need. xxxnewlinexxx O! what excuse will my poor beast then find, xxxnewlinexxx When swift extremity can seem but slow? xxxnewlinexxx Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind, xxxnewlinexxx In winged speed n:motion shall I know, xxxnewlinexxx Then can no horse with my desire keep pace; xxxnewlinexxx Therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made, xxxnewlinexxx Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race; xxxnewlinexxx But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,-- xxxnewlinexxx   'Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow, xxxnewlinexxx   Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.' xxxendxxx
So am I as the rich, whose blessed key, xxxnewlinexxx Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure, xxxnewlinexxx The which he will not every hour survey, xxxnewlinexxx For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.  xxxnewlinexxx Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare, xxxnewlinexxx Since, seldom coming in that long year set, xxxnewlinexxx Like stones of worth they thinly placed are, xxxnewlinexxx Or captain jewels in the carcanet. xxxnewlinexxx So is the time that keeps you as my chest, xxxnewlinexxx Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide, xxxnewlinexxx To make some special instant special-blest, xxxnewlinexxx By new unfolding his imprison'd pride. xxxnewlinexxx   Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope, xxxnewlinexxx   Being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope. xxxendxxx
What is your substance, whereof are you made, xxxnewlinexxx That millions of strange shadows on you tend? xxxnewlinexxx Since every one, hath every one, one shade, xxxnewlinexxx And you but one, can every shadow lend. xxxnewlinexxx Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit xxxnewlinexxx Is poorly imitated after you; xxxnewlinexxx On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set, xxxnewlinexxx And you in Grecian tires are painted new:  xxxnewlinexxx Speak of the spring, and foison of the year, xxxnewlinexxx The one doth shadow of your beauty show, xxxnewlinexxx The other as your bounty doth appear; xxxnewlinexxx And you in every blessed shape we know. xxxnewlinexxx   In all external grace you have some part, xxxnewlinexxx   But you like none, none you, for constant heart. xxxendxxx
O! how much more doth beauty beauteous seem xxxnewlinexxx By that sweet ornament which truth doth give. xxxnewlinexxx The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem xxxnewlinexxx For that sweet odour, which doth in it live. xxxnewlinexxx The canker blooms have full as deep a dye xxxnewlinexxx As the perfumed tincture of the roses. xxxnewlinexxx Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly xxxnewlinexxx When summer's breath their masked buds discloses: xxxnewlinexxx But, for their virtue only is their show, xxxnewlinexxx They live unwoo'd, and unrespected fade; xxxnewlinexxx Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so; xxxnewlinexxx Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made:  xxxnewlinexxx   And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth, xxxnewlinexxx   When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth. xxxendxxx
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments xxxnewlinexxx Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme; xxxnewlinexxx But you shall shine more bright in these contents xxxnewlinexxx Than unswept stone, besmear'd with sluttish time. xxxnewlinexxx When wasteful war shall statues overturn, xxxnewlinexxx And broils root out the work of masonry, xxxnewlinexxx Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn xxxnewlinexxx The living record of your memory. xxxnewlinexxx 'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity xxxnewlinexxx Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room xxxnewlinexxx Even in the eyes of all posterity xxxnewlinexxx That wear this world out to the ending doom. xxxnewlinexxx   So, till the judgment that yourself arise, xxxnewlinexxx   You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes. xxxendxxx
Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said xxxnewlinexxx Thy edge should blunter be than appetite, xxxnewlinexxx Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd, xxxnewlinexxx To-morrow sharpened in his former might: xxxnewlinexxx So, love, be thou, although to-day thou fill xxxnewlinexxx Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness, xxxnewlinexxx To-morrow see again, and do not kill xxxnewlinexxx The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness. xxxnewlinexxx Let this sad interim like the ocean be xxxnewlinexxx Which parts the shore, where two contracted new xxxnewlinexxx Come daily to the banks, that when they see xxxnewlinexxx Return of love, more blest may be the view; xxxnewlinexxx   Or call it winter, which being full of care, xxxnewlinexxx   Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare. xxxendxxx
Being your slave what should I do but tend, xxxnewlinexxx Upon the hours, and times of your desire? xxxnewlinexxx I have no precious time at all to spend; xxxnewlinexxx Nor services to do, till you require.  xxxnewlinexxx Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour, xxxnewlinexxx Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you, xxxnewlinexxx Nor think the bitterness of absence sour, xxxnewlinexxx When you have bid your servant once adieu; xxxnewlinexxx Nor dare I question with my jealous thought xxxnewlinexxx Where you may be, or your affairs suppose, xxxnewlinexxx But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought xxxnewlinexxx Save, where you are, how happy you make those. xxxnewlinexxx   So true a fool is love, that in your will, xxxnewlinexxx   Though you do anything, he thinks no ill. xxxendxxx
That god forbid, that made me first your slave, xxxnewlinexxx I should in thought control your times of pleasure, xxxnewlinexxx Or at your hand the account of hours to crave, xxxnewlinexxx Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure! xxxnewlinexxx O! let me suffer, being at your beck, xxxnewlinexxx The imprison'd absence of your liberty; xxxnewlinexxx And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check, xxxnewlinexxx Without accusing you of injury.  xxxnewlinexxx Be where you list, your charter is so strong xxxnewlinexxx That you yourself may privilage your time xxxnewlinexxx To what you will; to you it doth belong xxxnewlinexxx Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime. xxxnewlinexxx   I am to wait, though waiting so be hell, xxxnewlinexxx   Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well. xxxendxxx
If there be nothing new, but that which is xxxnewlinexxx Hath been before, how are our brains beguil'd, xxxnewlinexxx Which labouring for invention bear amiss xxxnewlinexxx The second burthen of a former child! xxxnewlinexxx O! that record could with a backward look, xxxnewlinexxx Even of five hundred courses of the sun, xxxnewlinexxx Show me your image in some antique book, xxxnewlinexxx Since mind at first in character was done! xxxnewlinexxx That I might see what the old world could say xxxnewlinexxx To this composed wonder of your frame; xxxnewlinexxx Wh'r we are mended, or wh'r better they, xxxnewlinexxx Or whether revolution be the same.  xxxnewlinexxx   O! sure I am the wits of former days, xxxnewlinexxx   To subjects worse have given admiring praise. xxxendxxx
Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore, xxxnewlinexxx So do our minutes hasten to their end; xxxnewlinexxx Each changing place with that which goes before, xxxnewlinexxx In sequent toil all forwards do contend. xxxnewlinexxx Nativity, once in the main of light, xxxnewlinexxx Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd, xxxnewlinexxx Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight, xxxnewlinexxx And Time that gave doth now his gift confound. xxxnewlinexxx Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth xxxnewlinexxx And delves the parallels in beauty's brow, xxxnewlinexxx Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth, xxxnewlinexxx And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow: xxxnewlinexxx   And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand. xxxnewlinexxx   Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand. xxxendxxx
Is it thy will, thy image should keep open xxxnewlinexxx My heavy eyelids to the weary night? xxxnewlinexxx Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken, xxxnewlinexxx While shadows like to thee do mock my sight? xxxnewlinexxx Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee xxxnewlinexxx So far from home into my deeds to pry, xxxnewlinexxx To find out shames and idle hours in me, xxxnewlinexxx The scope and tenure of thy jealousy? xxxnewlinexxx O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great: xxxnewlinexxx It is my love that keeps mine eye awake: xxxnewlinexxx Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat, xxxnewlinexxx To play the watchman ever for thy sake: xxxnewlinexxx   For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere, xxxnewlinexxx   From me far off, with others all too near. xxxendxxx
Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye xxxnewlinexxx And all my soul, and all my every part; xxxnewlinexxx And for this sin there is no remedy, xxxnewlinexxx It is so grounded inward in my heart. xxxnewlinexxx Methinks no face so gracious is as mine, xxxnewlinexxx No shape so true, no truth of such account; xxxnewlinexxx And for myself mine own worth do define, xxxnewlinexxx As I all other in all worths surmount. xxxnewlinexxx But when my glass shows me myself indeed xxxnewlinexxx Beated and chopp'd with tanned antiquity, xxxnewlinexxx Mine own self-love quite contrary I read; xxxnewlinexxx Self so self-loving were iniquity. xxxnewlinexxx   'Tis thee,--myself,--that for myself I praise, xxxnewlinexxx   Painting my age with beauty of thy days. xxxendxxx
Against my love shall be as I am now, xxxnewlinexxx With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'erworn; xxxnewlinexxx When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow xxxnewlinexxx With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn xxxnewlinexxx Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night; xxxnewlinexxx And all those beauties whereof now he's king xxxnewlinexxx Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight, xxxnewlinexxx Stealing away the treasure of his spring;  xxxnewlinexxx For such a time do I now fortify xxxnewlinexxx Against confounding age's cruel knife, xxxnewlinexxx That he shall never cut from memory xxxnewlinexxx My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life: xxxnewlinexxx   His beauty shall in these black lines be seen, xxxnewlinexxx   And they shall live, and he in them still green. xxxendxxx
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defac'd xxxnewlinexxx The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age; xxxnewlinexxx When sometime lofty towers I see down-raz'd, xxxnewlinexxx And brass eternal slave to mortal rage; xxxnewlinexxx When I have seen the hungry ocean gain xxxnewlinexxx Advantage on the kingdom of the shore, xxxnewlinexxx And the firm soil win of the watery main, xxxnewlinexxx Increasing store with loss, and loss with store; xxxnewlinexxx When I have seen such interchange of state, xxxnewlinexxx Or state itself confounded, to decay; xxxnewlinexxx Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate-- xxxnewlinexxx That Time will come and take my love away.  xxxnewlinexxx   This thought is as a death which cannot choose xxxnewlinexxx   But weep to have, that which it fears to lose. xxxendxxx
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea, xxxnewlinexxx But sad mortality o'ersways their power, xxxnewlinexxx How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, xxxnewlinexxx Whose action is no stronger than a flower? xxxnewlinexxx O! how shall summer's honey breath hold out, xxxnewlinexxx Against the wrackful siege of battering days, xxxnewlinexxx When rocks impregnable are not so stout, xxxnewlinexxx Nor gates of steel so strong but Time decays? xxxnewlinexxx O fearful meditation! where, alack, xxxnewlinexxx Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid? xxxnewlinexxx Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? xxxnewlinexxx Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid? xxxnewlinexxx   O! none, unless this miracle have might, xxxnewlinexxx   That in black ink my love may still shine bright. xxxendxxx
Tired with all these, for restful death I cry, xxxnewlinexxx As to behold desert a beggar born, xxxnewlinexxx And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity, xxxnewlinexxx And purest faith unhappily forsworn, xxxnewlinexxx And gilded honour shamefully misplac'd, xxxnewlinexxx And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted, xxxnewlinexxx And right perfection wrongfully disgrac'd, xxxnewlinexxx And strength by limping sway disabled xxxnewlinexxx And art made tongue-tied by authority, xxxnewlinexxx And folly--doctor-like--controlling skill, xxxnewlinexxx And simple truth miscall'd simplicity, xxxnewlinexxx And captive good attending captain ill: xxxnewlinexxx   Tir'd with all these, from these would I be gone, xxxnewlinexxx   Save that, to die, I leave my love alone. xxxendxxx
Ah! wherefore with infection should he live, xxxnewlinexxx And with his presence grace impiety, xxxnewlinexxx That sin by him advantage should achieve, xxxnewlinexxx And lace itself with his society?  xxxnewlinexxx Why should false painting imitate his cheek, xxxnewlinexxx And steel dead seeming of his living hue? xxxnewlinexxx Why should poor beauty indirectly seek xxxnewlinexxx Roses of shadow, since his rose is true? xxxnewlinexxx Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is, xxxnewlinexxx Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins? xxxnewlinexxx For she hath no exchequer now but his, xxxnewlinexxx And proud of many, lives upon his gains. xxxnewlinexxx   O! him she stores, to show what wealth she had xxxnewlinexxx   In days long since, before these last so bad. xxxendxxx
Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn, xxxnewlinexxx When beauty lived and died as flowers do now, xxxnewlinexxx Before these bastard signs of fair were born, xxxnewlinexxx Or durst inhabit on a living brow; xxxnewlinexxx Before the golden tresses of the dead, xxxnewlinexxx The right of sepulchres, were shorn away, xxxnewlinexxx To live a second life on second head; xxxnewlinexxx Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:  xxxnewlinexxx In him those holy antique hours are seen, xxxnewlinexxx Without all ornament, itself and true, xxxnewlinexxx Making no summer of another's green, xxxnewlinexxx Robbing no old to dress his beauty new; xxxnewlinexxx   And him as for a map doth Nature store, xxxnewlinexxx   To show false Art what beauty was of yore. xxxendxxx
Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view xxxnewlinexxx Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend; xxxnewlinexxx All tongues--the voice of souls--give thee that due, xxxnewlinexxx Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend. xxxnewlinexxx Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd; xxxnewlinexxx But those same tongues, that give thee so thine own, xxxnewlinexxx In other accents do this praise confound xxxnewlinexxx By seeing farther than the eye hath shown. xxxnewlinexxx They look into the beauty of thy mind, xxxnewlinexxx And that in guess they measure by thy deeds; xxxnewlinexxx Then--churls--their thoughts, although their eyes were kind, xxxnewlinexxx To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:  xxxnewlinexxx   But why thy odour matcheth not thy show, xxxnewlinexxx   The soil is this, that thou dost common grow. xxxendxxx
That thou art blam'd shall not be thy defect, xxxnewlinexxx For slander's mark was ever yet the fair; xxxnewlinexxx The ornament of beauty is suspect, xxxnewlinexxx A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air. xxxnewlinexxx So thou be good, slander doth but approve xxxnewlinexxx Thy worth the greater being woo'd of time; xxxnewlinexxx For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love, xxxnewlinexxx And thou present'st a pure unstained prime. xxxnewlinexxx Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days xxxnewlinexxx Either not assail'd, or victor being charg'd; xxxnewlinexxx Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise, xxxnewlinexxx To tie up envy, evermore enlarg'd, xxxnewlinexxx   If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show, xxxnewlinexxx   Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe. xxxendxxx
No longer mourn for me when I am dead xxxnewlinexxx Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell xxxnewlinexxx Give warning to the world that I am fled xxxnewlinexxx From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell: xxxnewlinexxx Nay, if you read this line, remember not xxxnewlinexxx The hand that writ it, for I love you so, xxxnewlinexxx That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot, xxxnewlinexxx If thinking on me then should make you woe. xxxnewlinexxx O! if,--I say you look upon this verse, xxxnewlinexxx When I perhaps compounded am with clay, xxxnewlinexxx Do not so much as my poor name rehearse; xxxnewlinexxx But let your love even with my life decay; xxxnewlinexxx   Lest the wise world should look into your moan, xxxnewlinexxx   And mock you with me after I am gone. xxxendxxx
O! lest the world should task you to recite xxxnewlinexxx What merit lived in me, that you should love xxxnewlinexxx After my death,--dear love, forget me quite, xxxnewlinexxx For you in me can nothing worthy prove; xxxnewlinexxx Unless you would devise some virtuous lie, xxxnewlinexxx To do more for me than mine own desert, xxxnewlinexxx And hang more praise upon deceased I xxxnewlinexxx Than niggard truth would willingly impart: xxxnewlinexxx O! lest your true love may seem false in this xxxnewlinexxx That you for love speak well of me untrue, xxxnewlinexxx My name be buried where my body is, xxxnewlinexxx And live no more to shame nor me nor you. xxxnewlinexxx   For I am shamed by that which I bring forth, xxxnewlinexxx   And so should you, to love things nothing worth. xxxendxxx
That time of year thou mayst in me behold xxxnewlinexxx When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang xxxnewlinexxx Upon those boughs which shake against the cold, xxxnewlinexxx Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang. xxxnewlinexxx In me thou see'st the twilight of such day xxxnewlinexxx As after sunset fadeth in the west; xxxnewlinexxx Which by and by black night doth take away, xxxnewlinexxx Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.  xxxnewlinexxx In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire, xxxnewlinexxx That on the ashes of his youth doth lie, xxxnewlinexxx As the death-bed, whereon it must expire, xxxnewlinexxx Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by. xxxnewlinexxx   This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong, xxxnewlinexxx   To love that well, which thou must leave ere long. xxxendxxx
But be contented: when that fell arrest xxxnewlinexxx Without all bail shall carry me away, xxxnewlinexxx My life hath in this line some interest, xxxnewlinexxx Which for memorial still with thee shall stay. xxxnewlinexxx When thou reviewest this, thou dost review xxxnewlinexxx The very part was consecrate to thee: xxxnewlinexxx The earth can have but earth, which is his due; xxxnewlinexxx My spirit is thine, the better part of me: xxxnewlinexxx So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life, xxxnewlinexxx The prey of worms, my body being dead; xxxnewlinexxx The coward conquest of a wretch's knife, xxxnewlinexxx Too base of thee to be remembered,. xxxnewlinexxx   The worth of that is that which it contains, xxxnewlinexxx   And that is this, and this with thee remains. xxxendxxx
So are you to my thoughts as food to life, xxxnewlinexxx Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground; xxxnewlinexxx And for the peace of you I hold such strife xxxnewlinexxx As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found. xxxnewlinexxx Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon xxxnewlinexxx Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure; xxxnewlinexxx Now counting best to be with you alone, xxxnewlinexxx Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure: xxxnewlinexxx Sometime all full with feasting on your sight, xxxnewlinexxx And by and by clean starved for a look; xxxnewlinexxx Possessing or pursuing no delight, xxxnewlinexxx Save what is had, or must from you be took. xxxnewlinexxx   Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day, xxxnewlinexxx   Or gluttoning on all, or all away. xxxendxxx
Why is my verse so barren of new pride, xxxnewlinexxx So far from variation or quick change? xxxnewlinexxx Why with the time do I not glance aside xxxnewlinexxx To new-found methods, and to compounds strange? xxxnewlinexxx Why write I still all one, ever the same, xxxnewlinexxx And keep invention in a noted weed, xxxnewlinexxx That every word doth almost tell my name, xxxnewlinexxx Showing their birth, and where they did proceed? xxxnewlinexxx O! know sweet love I always write of you, xxxnewlinexxx And you and love are still my argument; xxxnewlinexxx So all my best is dressing old words new, xxxnewlinexxx Spending again what is already spent: xxxnewlinexxx   For as the sun is daily new and old, xxxnewlinexxx   So is my love still telling what is told. xxxendxxx
Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear, xxxnewlinexxx Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste; xxxnewlinexxx These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear, xxxnewlinexxx And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.  xxxnewlinexxx The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show xxxnewlinexxx Of mouthed graves will give thee memory; xxxnewlinexxx Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know xxxnewlinexxx Time's thievish progress to eternity. xxxnewlinexxx Look! what thy memory cannot contain, xxxnewlinexxx Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find xxxnewlinexxx Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain, xxxnewlinexxx To take a new acquaintance of thy mind. xxxnewlinexxx   These offices, so oft as thou wilt look, xxxnewlinexxx   Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book. xxxendxxx
So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse, xxxnewlinexxx And found such fair assistance in my verse xxxnewlinexxx As every alien pen hath got my use xxxnewlinexxx And under thee their poesy disperse. xxxnewlinexxx Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing xxxnewlinexxx And heavy ignorance aloft to fly, xxxnewlinexxx Have added feathers to the learned's wing xxxnewlinexxx And given grace a double majesty. xxxnewlinexxx Yet be most proud of that which I compile, xxxnewlinexxx Whose influence is thine, and born of thee: xxxnewlinexxx In others' works thou dost but mend the style, xxxnewlinexxx And arts with thy sweet graces graced be; xxxnewlinexxx   But thou art all my art, and dost advance xxxnewlinexxx   As high as learning, my rude ignorance. xxxendxxx
Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid, xxxnewlinexxx My verse alone had all thy gentle grace; xxxnewlinexxx But now my gracious numbers are decay'd, xxxnewlinexxx And my sick Muse doth give an other place. xxxnewlinexxx I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument xxxnewlinexxx Deserves the travail of a worthier pen; xxxnewlinexxx Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent xxxnewlinexxx He robs thee of, and pays it thee again. xxxnewlinexxx He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word xxxnewlinexxx From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give, xxxnewlinexxx And found it in thy cheek: he can afford xxxnewlinexxx No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.  xxxnewlinexxx   Then thank him not for that which he doth say, xxxnewlinexxx   Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay. xxxendxxx
O! how I faint when I of you do write, xxxnewlinexxx Knowing a better spirit doth use your name, xxxnewlinexxx And in the praise thereof spends all his might, xxxnewlinexxx To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame! xxxnewlinexxx But since your worth--wide as the ocean is,-- xxxnewlinexxx The humble as the proudest sail doth bear, xxxnewlinexxx My saucy bark, inferior far to his, xxxnewlinexxx On your broad main doth wilfully appear. xxxnewlinexxx Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat, xxxnewlinexxx Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride; xxxnewlinexxx Or, being wrack'd, I am a worthless boat, xxxnewlinexxx He of tall building, and of goodly pride: xxxnewlinexxx   Then if he thrive and I be cast away, xxxnewlinexxx   The worst was this,--my love was my decay. xxxendxxx
Or I shall live your epitaph to make, xxxnewlinexxx Or you survive when I in earth am rotten; xxxnewlinexxx From hence your memory death cannot take, xxxnewlinexxx Although in me each part will be forgotten. xxxnewlinexxx Your name from hence immortal life shall have, xxxnewlinexxx Though I, once gone, to all the world must die: xxxnewlinexxx The earth can yield me but a common grave, xxxnewlinexxx When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie. xxxnewlinexxx Your monument shall be my gentle verse, xxxnewlinexxx Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read; xxxnewlinexxx And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse, xxxnewlinexxx When all the breathers of this world are dead; xxxnewlinexxx   You still shall live,--such virtue hath my pen,-- xxxnewlinexxx   Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men. xxxendxxx
I grant thou wert not married to my Muse, xxxnewlinexxx And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook xxxnewlinexxx The dedicated words which writers use xxxnewlinexxx Of their fair subject, blessing every book.  xxxnewlinexxx Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue, xxxnewlinexxx Finding thy worth a limit past my praise; xxxnewlinexxx And therefore art enforced to seek anew xxxnewlinexxx Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days. xxxnewlinexxx And do so, love; yet when they have devis'd, xxxnewlinexxx What strained touches rhetoric can lend, xxxnewlinexxx Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathiz'd xxxnewlinexxx In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend; xxxnewlinexxx   And their gross painting might be better us'd xxxnewlinexxx   Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abus'd. xxxendxxx
I never saw that you did painting need, xxxnewlinexxx And therefore to your fair no painting set; xxxnewlinexxx I found, or thought I found, you did exceed xxxnewlinexxx That barren tender of a poet's debt: xxxnewlinexxx And therefore have I slept in your report, xxxnewlinexxx That you yourself, being extant, well might show xxxnewlinexxx How far a modern quill doth come too short, xxxnewlinexxx Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.  xxxnewlinexxx This silence for my sin you did impute, xxxnewlinexxx Which shall be most my glory being dumb; xxxnewlinexxx For I impair not beauty being mute, xxxnewlinexxx When others would give life, and bring a tomb. xxxnewlinexxx   There lives more life in one of your fair eyes xxxnewlinexxx   Than both your poets can in praise devise. xxxendxxx
Who is it that says most, which can say more, xxxnewlinexxx Than this rich praise,--that you alone, are you? xxxnewlinexxx In whose confine immured is the store xxxnewlinexxx Which should example where your equal grew. xxxnewlinexxx Lean penury within that pen doth dwell xxxnewlinexxx That to his subject lends not some small glory; xxxnewlinexxx But he that writes of you, if he can tell xxxnewlinexxx That you are you, so dignifies his story, xxxnewlinexxx Let him but copy what in you is writ, xxxnewlinexxx Not making worse what nature made so clear, xxxnewlinexxx And such a counterpart shall fame his wit, xxxnewlinexxx Making his style admired every where. xxxnewlinexxx   You to your beauteous blessings add a curse, xxxnewlinexxx   Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse. xxxendxxx
My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still, xxxnewlinexxx While comments of your praise richly compil'd, xxxnewlinexxx Reserve their character with golden quill, xxxnewlinexxx And precious phrase by all the Muses fil'd. xxxnewlinexxx I think good thoughts, whilst others write good words, xxxnewlinexxx And like unlettered clerk still cry 'Amen' xxxnewlinexxx To every hymn that able spirit affords, xxxnewlinexxx In polish'd form of well-refined pen. xxxnewlinexxx Hearing you praised, I say ''tis so, 'tis true,' xxxnewlinexxx And to the most of praise add something more; xxxnewlinexxx But that is in my thought, whose love to you, xxxnewlinexxx Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before. xxxnewlinexxx   Then others, for the breath of words respect, xxxnewlinexxx   Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect. xxxendxxx
Was it the proud full sail of his great verse, xxxnewlinexxx Bound for the prize of all too precious you, xxxnewlinexxx That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse, xxxnewlinexxx Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew? xxxnewlinexxx Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write, xxxnewlinexxx Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead? xxxnewlinexxx No, neither he, nor his compeers by night xxxnewlinexxx Giving him aid, my verse astonished. xxxnewlinexxx He, nor that affable familiar ghost xxxnewlinexxx Which nightly gulls him with intelligence, xxxnewlinexxx As victors of my silence cannot boast; xxxnewlinexxx I was not sick of any fear from thence: xxxnewlinexxx   But when your countenance fill'd up his line, xxxnewlinexxx   Then lacked I matter; that enfeebled mine. xxxendxxx
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing, xxxnewlinexxx And like enough thou know'st thy estimate, xxxnewlinexxx The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing; xxxnewlinexxx My bonds in thee are all determinate. xxxnewlinexxx For how do I hold thee but by thy granting? xxxnewlinexxx And for that riches where is my deserving? xxxnewlinexxx The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, xxxnewlinexxx And so my patent back again is swerving. xxxnewlinexxx Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing, xxxnewlinexxx Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking; xxxnewlinexxx So thy great gift, upon misprision growing, xxxnewlinexxx Comes home again, on better judgement making. xxxnewlinexxx   Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter, xxxnewlinexxx   In sleep a king, but waking no such matter. xxxendxxx
When thou shalt be dispos'd to set me light, xxxnewlinexxx And place my merit in the eye of scorn, xxxnewlinexxx Upon thy side, against myself I'll fight, xxxnewlinexxx And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn. xxxnewlinexxx With mine own weakness, being best acquainted, xxxnewlinexxx Upon thy part I can set down a story xxxnewlinexxx Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted; xxxnewlinexxx That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:  xxxnewlinexxx And I by this will be a gainer too; xxxnewlinexxx For bending all my loving thoughts on thee, xxxnewlinexxx The injuries that to myself I do, xxxnewlinexxx Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me. xxxnewlinexxx   Such is my love, to thee I so belong, xxxnewlinexxx   That for thy right, myself will bear all wrong. xxxendxxx
Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault, xxxnewlinexxx And I will comment upon that offence: xxxnewlinexxx Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt, xxxnewlinexxx Against thy reasons making no defence. xxxnewlinexxx Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill, xxxnewlinexxx To set a form upon desired change, xxxnewlinexxx As I'll myself disgrace; knowing thy will, xxxnewlinexxx I will acquaintance strangle, and look strange; xxxnewlinexxx Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue xxxnewlinexxx Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell, xxxnewlinexxx Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong, xxxnewlinexxx And haply of our old acquaintance tell.  xxxnewlinexxx   For thee, against my self I'll vow debate, xxxnewlinexxx   For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate. xxxendxxx
Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now; xxxnewlinexxx Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross, xxxnewlinexxx Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow, xxxnewlinexxx And do not drop in for an after-loss: xxxnewlinexxx Ah! do not, when my heart hath 'scap'd this sorrow, xxxnewlinexxx Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe; xxxnewlinexxx Give not a windy night a rainy morrow, xxxnewlinexxx To linger out a purpos'd overthrow. xxxnewlinexxx If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last, xxxnewlinexxx When other petty griefs have done their spite, xxxnewlinexxx But in the onset come: so shall I taste xxxnewlinexxx At first the very worst of fortune's might; xxxnewlinexxx   And other strains of woe, which now seem woe, xxxnewlinexxx   Compar'd with loss of thee, will not seem so. xxxendxxx
Some glory in their birth, some in their skill, xxxnewlinexxx Some in their wealth, some in their body's force, xxxnewlinexxx Some in their garments though new-fangled ill; xxxnewlinexxx Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse; xxxnewlinexxx And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure, xxxnewlinexxx Wherein it finds a joy above the rest: xxxnewlinexxx But these particulars are not my measure, xxxnewlinexxx All these I better in one general best. xxxnewlinexxx Thy love is better than high birth to me, xxxnewlinexxx Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs, xxxnewlinexxx Of more delight than hawks and horses be; xxxnewlinexxx And having thee, of all men's pride I boast: xxxnewlinexxx   Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take xxxnewlinexxx   All this away, and me most wretchcd make. xxxendxxx
But do thy worst to steal thyself away, xxxnewlinexxx For term of life thou art assured mine; xxxnewlinexxx And life no longer than thy love will stay, xxxnewlinexxx For it depends upon that love of thine.  xxxnewlinexxx Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs, xxxnewlinexxx When in the least of them my life hath end. xxxnewlinexxx I see a better state to me belongs xxxnewlinexxx Than that which on thy humour doth depend: xxxnewlinexxx Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind, xxxnewlinexxx Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie. xxxnewlinexxx O! what a happy title do I find, xxxnewlinexxx Happy to have thy love, happy to die! xxxnewlinexxx   But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot? xxxnewlinexxx   Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not. xxxendxxx
So shall I live, supposing thou art true, xxxnewlinexxx Like a deceived husband; so love's face xxxnewlinexxx May still seem love to me, though alter'd new; xxxnewlinexxx Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place: xxxnewlinexxx For there can live no hatred in thine eye, xxxnewlinexxx Therefore in that I cannot know thy change. xxxnewlinexxx In many's looks, the false heart's history xxxnewlinexxx Is writ in moods, and frowns, and wrinkles strange.  xxxnewlinexxx But heaven in thy creation did decree xxxnewlinexxx That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell; xxxnewlinexxx Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be, xxxnewlinexxx Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell. xxxnewlinexxx   How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow, xxxnewlinexxx   If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show! xxxendxxx
They that have power to hurt, and will do none, xxxnewlinexxx That do not do the thing they most do show, xxxnewlinexxx Who, moving others, are themselves as stone, xxxnewlinexxx Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow; xxxnewlinexxx They rightly do inherit heaven's graces, xxxnewlinexxx And husband nature's riches from expense; xxxnewlinexxx They are the lords and owners of their faces, xxxnewlinexxx Others, but stewards of their excellence. xxxnewlinexxx The summer's flower is to the summer sweet, xxxnewlinexxx Though to itself, it only live and die, xxxnewlinexxx But if that flower with base infection meet, xxxnewlinexxx The basest weed outbraves his dignity:  xxxnewlinexxx   For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; xxxnewlinexxx   Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds. xxxendxxx
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame xxxnewlinexxx Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose, xxxnewlinexxx Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name! xxxnewlinexxx O! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose. xxxnewlinexxx That tongue that tells the story of thy days, xxxnewlinexxx Making lascivious comments on thy sport, xxxnewlinexxx Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise; xxxnewlinexxx Naming thy name, blesses an ill report. xxxnewlinexxx O! what a mansion have those vices got xxxnewlinexxx Which for their habitation chose out thee, xxxnewlinexxx Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot xxxnewlinexxx And all things turns to fair that eyes can see! xxxnewlinexxx   Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege; xxxnewlinexxx   The hardest knife ill-us'd doth lose his edge. xxxendxxx
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness; xxxnewlinexxx Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport; xxxnewlinexxx Both grace and faults are lov'd of more and less: xxxnewlinexxx Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort. xxxnewlinexxx As on the finger of a throned queen xxxnewlinexxx The basest jewel will be well esteem'd, xxxnewlinexxx So are those errors that in thee are seen xxxnewlinexxx To truths translated, and for true things deem'd. xxxnewlinexxx How many lambs might the stern wolf betray, xxxnewlinexxx If like a lamb he could his looks translate! xxxnewlinexxx How many gazers mightst thou lead away, xxxnewlinexxx if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state! xxxnewlinexxx   But do not so; I love thee in such sort, xxxnewlinexxx   As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report. xxxendxxx
How like a winter hath my absence been xxxnewlinexxx From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year! xxxnewlinexxx What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen! xxxnewlinexxx What old December's bareness everywhere!  xxxnewlinexxx And yet this time removed was summer's time; xxxnewlinexxx The teeming autumn, big with rich increase, xxxnewlinexxx Bearing the wanton burden of the prime, xxxnewlinexxx Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease: xxxnewlinexxx Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me xxxnewlinexxx But hope of orphans, and unfather'd fruit; xxxnewlinexxx For summer and his pleasures wait on thee, xxxnewlinexxx And, thou away, the very birds are mute: xxxnewlinexxx   Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer, xxxnewlinexxx   That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near. xxxendxxx
From you have I been absent in the spring, xxxnewlinexxx When proud-pied April, dress'd in all his trim, xxxnewlinexxx Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing, xxxnewlinexxx That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him. xxxnewlinexxx Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell xxxnewlinexxx Of different flowers in odour and in hue, xxxnewlinexxx Could make me any summer's story tell, xxxnewlinexxx Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:  xxxnewlinexxx Nor did I wonder at the lily's white, xxxnewlinexxx Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose; xxxnewlinexxx They were but sweet, but figures of delight, xxxnewlinexxx Drawn after you, you pattern of all those. xxxnewlinexxx   Yet seem'd it winter still, and you away, xxxnewlinexxx   As with your shadow I with these did play. xxxendxxx
The forward violet thus did I chide: xxxnewlinexxx Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells, xxxnewlinexxx If not from my love's breath? The purple pride xxxnewlinexxx Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells xxxnewlinexxx In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dy'd. xxxnewlinexxx The lily I condemned for thy hand, xxxnewlinexxx And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair; xxxnewlinexxx The roses fearfully on thorns did stand, xxxnewlinexxx One blushing shame, another white despair; xxxnewlinexxx A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both, xxxnewlinexxx And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath; xxxnewlinexxx But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth  xxxnewlinexxx A vengeful canker eat him up to death. xxxnewlinexxx   More flowers I noted, yet I none could see, xxxnewlinexxx   But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee. xxxendxxx
Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long, xxxnewlinexxx To speak of that which gives thee all thy might? xxxnewlinexxx Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song, xxxnewlinexxx Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light? xxxnewlinexxx Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem, xxxnewlinexxx In gentle numbers time so idly spent; xxxnewlinexxx Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem xxxnewlinexxx And gives thy pen both skill and argument. xxxnewlinexxx Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey, xxxnewlinexxx If Time have any wrinkle graven there; xxxnewlinexxx If any, be a satire to decay, xxxnewlinexxx And make time's spoils despised every where. xxxnewlinexxx   Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life, xxxnewlinexxx   So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife. xxxendxxx
O truant Muse what shall be thy amends xxxnewlinexxx For thy neglect of truth in beauty dy'd? xxxnewlinexxx Both truth and beauty on my love depends; xxxnewlinexxx So dost thou too, and therein dignified. xxxnewlinexxx Make answer Muse: wilt thou not haply say, xxxnewlinexxx 'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd; xxxnewlinexxx Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay; xxxnewlinexxx But best is best, if never intermix'd'? xxxnewlinexxx Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb? xxxnewlinexxx Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee xxxnewlinexxx To make him much outlive a gilded tomb xxxnewlinexxx And to be prais'd of ages yet to be. xxxnewlinexxx   Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how xxxnewlinexxx   To make him seem long hence as he shows now. xxxendxxx
My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming; xxxnewlinexxx I love not less, though less the show appear; xxxnewlinexxx That love is merchandiz'd, whose rich esteeming, xxxnewlinexxx The owner's tongue doth publish every where. xxxnewlinexxx Our love was new, and then but in the spring, xxxnewlinexxx When I was wont to greet it with my lays; xxxnewlinexxx As Philomel in summer's front doth sing, xxxnewlinexxx And stops her pipe in growth of riper days: xxxnewlinexxx Not that the summer is less pleasant now xxxnewlinexxx Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night, xxxnewlinexxx But that wild music burthens every bough, xxxnewlinexxx And sweets grown common lose their dear delight. xxxnewlinexxx   Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue: xxxnewlinexxx   Because I would not dull you with my song. xxxendxxx
Alack! what poverty my Muse brings forth, xxxnewlinexxx That having such a scope to show her pride, xxxnewlinexxx The argument, all bare, is of more worth xxxnewlinexxx Than when it hath my added praise beside! xxxnewlinexxx O! blame me not, if I no more can write! xxxnewlinexxx Look in your glass, and there appears a face xxxnewlinexxx That over-goes my blunt invention quite,  xxxnewlinexxx Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace. xxxnewlinexxx Were it not sinful then, striving to mend, xxxnewlinexxx To mar the subject that before was well? xxxnewlinexxx For to no other pass my verses tend xxxnewlinexxx Than of your graces and your gifts to tell; xxxnewlinexxx   And more, much more, than in my verse can sit, xxxnewlinexxx   Your own glass shows you when you look in it. xxxendxxx
To me, fair friend, you never can be old, xxxnewlinexxx For as you were when first your eye I ey'd, xxxnewlinexxx Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold, xxxnewlinexxx Have from the forests shook three summers' pride, xxxnewlinexxx Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd, xxxnewlinexxx In process of the seasons have I seen, xxxnewlinexxx Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd, xxxnewlinexxx Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green. xxxnewlinexxx Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand, xxxnewlinexxx Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv'd; xxxnewlinexxx So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand, xxxnewlinexxx Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceiv'd: xxxnewlinexxx   For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred: xxxnewlinexxx   Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead. xxxendxxx
Let not my love be call'd idolatry, xxxnewlinexxx Nor my beloved as an idol show, xxxnewlinexxx Since all alike my songs and praises be xxxnewlinexxx To one, of one, still such, and ever so. xxxnewlinexxx Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind, xxxnewlinexxx Still constant in a wondrous excellence; xxxnewlinexxx Therefore my verse to constancy confin'd, xxxnewlinexxx One thing expressing, leaves out difference. xxxnewlinexxx 'Fair, kind, and true,' is all my argument, xxxnewlinexxx 'Fair, kind, and true,' varying to other words; xxxnewlinexxx And in this change is my invention spent, xxxnewlinexxx Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords. xxxnewlinexxx   Fair, kind, and true, have often liv'd alone, xxxnewlinexxx   Which three till now, never kept seat in one. xxxendxxx
When in the chronicle of wasted time xxxnewlinexxx I see descriptions of the fairest wights, xxxnewlinexxx And beauty making beautiful old rime, xxxnewlinexxx In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights, xxxnewlinexxx Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best, xxxnewlinexxx Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow, xxxnewlinexxx I see their antique pen would have express'd xxxnewlinexxx Even such a beauty as you master now. xxxnewlinexxx So all their praises are but prophecies xxxnewlinexxx Of this our time, all you prefiguring; xxxnewlinexxx And for they looked but with divining eyes, xxxnewlinexxx They had not skill enough your worth to sing: xxxnewlinexxx   For we, which now behold these present days, xxxnewlinexxx   Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise. xxxendxxx
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul xxxnewlinexxx Of the wide world dreaming on things to come, xxxnewlinexxx Can yet the lease of my true love control,  xxxnewlinexxx Supposed as forfeit to a confin'd doom. xxxnewlinexxx The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd, xxxnewlinexxx And the sad augurs mock their own presage; xxxnewlinexxx Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd, xxxnewlinexxx And peace proclaims olives of endless age. xxxnewlinexxx Now with the drops of this most balmy time, xxxnewlinexxx My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes, xxxnewlinexxx Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rime, xxxnewlinexxx While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes: xxxnewlinexxx   And thou in this shalt find thy monument, xxxnewlinexxx   When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent. xxxendxxx
What's in the brain, that ink may character, xxxnewlinexxx Which hath not figur'd to thee my true spirit? xxxnewlinexxx What's new to speak, what now to register, xxxnewlinexxx That may express my love, or thy dear merit? xxxnewlinexxx Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine, xxxnewlinexxx I must each day say o'er the very same; xxxnewlinexxx Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,  xxxnewlinexxx Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name. xxxnewlinexxx So that eternal love in love's fresh case, xxxnewlinexxx Weighs not the dust and injury of age, xxxnewlinexxx Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place, xxxnewlinexxx But makes antiquity for aye his page; xxxnewlinexxx   Finding the first conceit of love there bred, xxxnewlinexxx   Where time and outward form would show it dead. xxxendxxx
O! never say that I was false of heart, xxxnewlinexxx Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify, xxxnewlinexxx As easy might I from my self depart xxxnewlinexxx As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie: xxxnewlinexxx That is my home of love: if I have rang'd, xxxnewlinexxx Like him that travels, I return again; xxxnewlinexxx Just to the time, not with the time exchang'd, xxxnewlinexxx So that myself bring water for my stain. xxxnewlinexxx Never believe though in my nature reign'd, xxxnewlinexxx All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, xxxnewlinexxx That it could so preposterously be stain'd,  xxxnewlinexxx To leave for nothing all thy sum of good; xxxnewlinexxx   For nothing this wide universe I call, xxxnewlinexxx   Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all. xxxendxxx
Alas! 'tis true, I have gone here and there, xxxnewlinexxx And made my self a motley to the view, xxxnewlinexxx Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, xxxnewlinexxx Made old offences of affections new; xxxnewlinexxx Most true it is, that I have look'd on truth xxxnewlinexxx Askance and strangely; but, by all above, xxxnewlinexxx These blenches gave my heart another youth, xxxnewlinexxx And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love. xxxnewlinexxx Now all is done, save what shall have no end: xxxnewlinexxx Mine appetite I never more will grind xxxnewlinexxx On newer proof, to try an older friend, xxxnewlinexxx A god in love, to whom I am confin'd. xxxnewlinexxx   Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best, xxxnewlinexxx   Even to thy pure and most most loving breast. xxxendxxx
O! for my sake do you with Fortune chide, xxxnewlinexxx The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, xxxnewlinexxx That did not better for my life provide xxxnewlinexxx Than public means which public manners breeds. xxxnewlinexxx Thence comes it that my name receives a brand, xxxnewlinexxx And almost thence my nature is subdu'd xxxnewlinexxx To what it works in, like the dyer's hand: xxxnewlinexxx Pity me, then, and wish I were renew'd; xxxnewlinexxx Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink, xxxnewlinexxx Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection; xxxnewlinexxx No bitterness that I will bitter think, xxxnewlinexxx Nor double penance, to correct correction. xxxnewlinexxx   Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye, xxxnewlinexxx   Even that your pity is enough to cure me. xxxendxxx
Your love and pity doth the impression fill, xxxnewlinexxx Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow; xxxnewlinexxx For what care I who calls me well or ill,  xxxnewlinexxx So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow? xxxnewlinexxx You are my all-the-world, and I must strive xxxnewlinexxx To know my shames and praises from your tongue; xxxnewlinexxx None else to me, nor I to none alive, xxxnewlinexxx That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong. xxxnewlinexxx In so profound abysm I throw all care xxxnewlinexxx Of others' voices, that my adder's sense xxxnewlinexxx To critic and to flatterer stopped are. xxxnewlinexxx Mark how with my neglect I do dispense: xxxnewlinexxx   You are so strongly in my purpose bred, xxxnewlinexxx   That all the world besides methinks are dead. xxxendxxx
Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind; xxxnewlinexxx And that which governs me to go about xxxnewlinexxx Doth part his function and is partly blind, xxxnewlinexxx Seems seeing, but effectually is out; xxxnewlinexxx For it no form delivers to the heart xxxnewlinexxx Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch: xxxnewlinexxx Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,  xxxnewlinexxx Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch; xxxnewlinexxx For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight, xxxnewlinexxx The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature, xxxnewlinexxx The mountain or the sea, the day or night: xxxnewlinexxx The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature. xxxnewlinexxx   Incapable of more, replete with you, xxxnewlinexxx   My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue. xxxendxxx
Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you, xxxnewlinexxx Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery? xxxnewlinexxx Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true, xxxnewlinexxx And that your love taught it this alchemy, xxxnewlinexxx To make of monsters and things indigest xxxnewlinexxx Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble, xxxnewlinexxx Creating every bad a perfect best, xxxnewlinexxx As fast as objects to his beams assemble? xxxnewlinexxx O! 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing, xxxnewlinexxx And my great mind most kingly drinks it up: xxxnewlinexxx Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing,  xxxnewlinexxx And to his palate doth prepare the cup: xxxnewlinexxx   If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin xxxnewlinexxx   That mine eye loves it and doth first begin. xxxendxxx
Those lines that I before have writ do lie, xxxnewlinexxx Even those that said I could not love you dearer: xxxnewlinexxx Yet then my judgment knew no reason why xxxnewlinexxx My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer. xxxnewlinexxx But reckoning Time, whose million'd accidents xxxnewlinexxx Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings, xxxnewlinexxx Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents, xxxnewlinexxx Divert strong minds to the course of altering things; xxxnewlinexxx Alas! why fearing of Time's tyranny, xxxnewlinexxx Might I not then say, 'Now I love you best,' xxxnewlinexxx When I was certain o'er incertainty, xxxnewlinexxx Crowning the present, doubting of the rest? xxxnewlinexxx   Love is a babe, then might I not say so, xxxnewlinexxx   To give full growth to that which still doth grow? xxxendxxx
Let me not to the marriage of true minds xxxnewlinexxx Admit impediments. Love is not love xxxnewlinexxx Which alters when it alteration finds, xxxnewlinexxx Or bends with the remover to remove: xxxnewlinexxx O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark, xxxnewlinexxx That looks on tempests and is never shaken; xxxnewlinexxx It is the star to every wandering bark, xxxnewlinexxx Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. xxxnewlinexxx Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks xxxnewlinexxx Within his bending sickle's compass come; xxxnewlinexxx Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, xxxnewlinexxx But bears it out even to the edge of doom. xxxnewlinexxx   If this be error and upon me prov'd, xxxnewlinexxx   I never writ, nor no man ever lov'd. xxxendxxx
Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all, xxxnewlinexxx Wherein I should your great deserts repay, xxxnewlinexxx Forgot upon your dearest love to call,  xxxnewlinexxx Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day; xxxnewlinexxx That I have frequent been with unknown minds, xxxnewlinexxx And given to time your own dear-purchas'd right; xxxnewlinexxx That I have hoisted sail to all the winds xxxnewlinexxx Which should transport me farthest from your sight. xxxnewlinexxx Book both my wilfulness and errors down, xxxnewlinexxx And on just proof surmise, accumulate; xxxnewlinexxx Bring me within the level of your frown, xxxnewlinexxx But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate; xxxnewlinexxx   Since my appeal says I did strive to prove xxxnewlinexxx   The constancy and virtue of your love. xxxendxxx
Like as, to make our appetite more keen, xxxnewlinexxx With eager compounds we our palate urge; xxxnewlinexxx As, to prevent our maladies unseen, xxxnewlinexxx We sicken to shun sickness when we purge; xxxnewlinexxx Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness, xxxnewlinexxx To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding; xxxnewlinexxx And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness xxxnewlinexxx To be diseas'd, ere that there was true needing. xxxnewlinexxx Thus policy in love, to anticipate xxxnewlinexxx The ills that were not, grew to faults assur'd, xxxnewlinexxx And brought to medicine a healthful state xxxnewlinexxx Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cur'd; xxxnewlinexxx   But thence I learn and find the lesson true, xxxnewlinexxx   Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you. xxxendxxx
What potions have I drunk of Siren tears, xxxnewlinexxx Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within, xxxnewlinexxx Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears, xxxnewlinexxx Still losing when I saw myself to win! xxxnewlinexxx What wretched errors hath my heart committed, xxxnewlinexxx Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never! xxxnewlinexxx How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted, xxxnewlinexxx In the distraction of this madding fever! xxxnewlinexxx O benefit of ill! now I find true xxxnewlinexxx That better is, by evil still made better; xxxnewlinexxx And ruin'd love, when it is built anew, xxxnewlinexxx Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater. xxxnewlinexxx   So I return rebuk'd to my content, xxxnewlinexxx   And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent. xxxendxxx
That you were once unkind befriends me now, xxxnewlinexxx And for that sorrow, which I then did feel, xxxnewlinexxx Needs must I under my transgression bow, xxxnewlinexxx Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel. xxxnewlinexxx For if you were by my unkindness shaken, xxxnewlinexxx As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time; xxxnewlinexxx And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken xxxnewlinexxx To weigh how once I suffer'd in your crime. xxxnewlinexxx O! that our night of woe might have remember'd xxxnewlinexxx My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits, xxxnewlinexxx And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd xxxnewlinexxx The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits! xxxnewlinexxx   But that your trespass now becomes a fee; xxxnewlinexxx   Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me. xxxendxxx
'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd, xxxnewlinexxx When not to be receives reproach of being; xxxnewlinexxx And the just pleasure lost, which is so deem'd xxxnewlinexxx Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing: xxxnewlinexxx For why should others' false adulterate eyes xxxnewlinexxx Give salutation to my sportive blood? xxxnewlinexxx Or on my frailties why are frailer spies, xxxnewlinexxx Which in their wills count bad what I think good? xxxnewlinexxx No, I am that I am, and they that level xxxnewlinexxx At my abuses reckon up their own: xxxnewlinexxx I may be straight though they themselves be bevel; xxxnewlinexxx By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown; xxxnewlinexxx   Unless this general evil they maintain, xxxnewlinexxx   All men are bad and in their badness reign. xxxendxxx
Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain xxxnewlinexxx Full character'd with lasting memory, xxxnewlinexxx Which shall above that idle rank remain, xxxnewlinexxx Beyond all date; even to eternity: xxxnewlinexxx Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart xxxnewlinexxx Have faculty by nature to subsist; xxxnewlinexxx Till each to raz'd oblivion yield his part xxxnewlinexxx Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd. xxxnewlinexxx That poor retention could not so much hold, xxxnewlinexxx Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score; xxxnewlinexxx Therefore to give them from me was I bold, xxxnewlinexxx To trust those tables that receive thee more: xxxnewlinexxx   To keep an adjunct to remember thee xxxnewlinexxx   Were to import forgetfulness in me. xxxendxxx
No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change: xxxnewlinexxx Thy pyramids built up with newer might xxxnewlinexxx To me are nothing novel, nothing strange; xxxnewlinexxx They are but dressings of a former sight. xxxnewlinexxx Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire xxxnewlinexxx What thou dost foist upon us that is old; xxxnewlinexxx And rather make them born to our desire xxxnewlinexxx Than think that we before have heard them told. xxxnewlinexxx Thy registers and thee I both defy, xxxnewlinexxx Not wondering at the present nor the past, xxxnewlinexxx For thy records and what we see doth lie, xxxnewlinexxx Made more or less by thy continual haste. xxxnewlinexxx   This I do vow and this shall ever be; xxxnewlinexxx   I will be true despite thy scythe and thee. xxxendxxx
If my dear love were but the child of state, xxxnewlinexxx It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd, xxxnewlinexxx As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate, xxxnewlinexxx Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd. xxxnewlinexxx No, it was builded far from accident; xxxnewlinexxx It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls xxxnewlinexxx Under the blow of thralled discontent, xxxnewlinexxx Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls: xxxnewlinexxx It fears not policy, that heretic, xxxnewlinexxx Which works on leases of short-number'd hours, xxxnewlinexxx But all alone stands hugely politic,  xxxnewlinexxx That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers. xxxnewlinexxx   To this I witness call the fools of time, xxxnewlinexxx   Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime. xxxendxxx
Were't aught to me I bore the canopy, xxxnewlinexxx With my extern the outward honouring, xxxnewlinexxx Or laid great bases for eternity, xxxnewlinexxx Which proves more short than waste or ruining? xxxnewlinexxx Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour xxxnewlinexxx Lose all and more by paying too much rent xxxnewlinexxx For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour, xxxnewlinexxx Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent? xxxnewlinexxx No; let me be obsequious in thy heart, xxxnewlinexxx And take thou my oblation, poor but free, xxxnewlinexxx Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art, xxxnewlinexxx But mutual render, only me for thee. xxxnewlinexxx   Hence, thou suborned informer! a true soul xxxnewlinexxx   When most impeach'd, stands least in thy control. xxxendxxx
O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power xxxnewlinexxx Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his fickle hour; xxxnewlinexxx Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st xxxnewlinexxx Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st. xxxnewlinexxx If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack, xxxnewlinexxx As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back, xxxnewlinexxx She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill xxxnewlinexxx May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill. xxxnewlinexxx Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure! xxxnewlinexxx She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure: xxxnewlinexxx   Her audit (though delayed) answered must be, xxxnewlinexxx   And her quietus is to render thee. xxxendxxx
In the old age black was not counted fair, xxxnewlinexxx Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name; xxxnewlinexxx But now is black beauty's successive heir, xxxnewlinexxx And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame: xxxnewlinexxx For since each hand hath put on Nature's power,  xxxnewlinexxx Fairing the foul with Art's false borrowed face, xxxnewlinexxx Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower, xxxnewlinexxx But is profan'd, if not lives in disgrace. xxxnewlinexxx Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black, xxxnewlinexxx Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem xxxnewlinexxx At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack, xxxnewlinexxx Sland'ring creation with a false esteem: xxxnewlinexxx   Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe, xxxnewlinexxx   That every tongue says beauty should look so. xxxendxxx
How oft when thou, my music, music play'st, xxxnewlinexxx Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds xxxnewlinexxx With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st xxxnewlinexxx The wiry concord that mine ear confounds, xxxnewlinexxx Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap, xxxnewlinexxx To kiss the tender inward of thy hand, xxxnewlinexxx Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap, xxxnewlinexxx At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand! xxxnewlinexxx To be so tickled, they would change their state  xxxnewlinexxx And situation with those dancing chips, xxxnewlinexxx O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait, xxxnewlinexxx Making dead wood more bless'd than living lips. xxxnewlinexxx   Since saucy jacks so happy are in this, xxxnewlinexxx   Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss. xxxendxxx
The expense of spirit in a waste of shame xxxnewlinexxx Is lust in action: and till action, lust xxxnewlinexxx Is perjur'd, murderous, bloody, full of blame, xxxnewlinexxx Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust; xxxnewlinexxx Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight; xxxnewlinexxx Past reason hunted; and no sooner had, xxxnewlinexxx Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait, xxxnewlinexxx On purpose laid to make the taker mad: xxxnewlinexxx Mad in pursuit and in possession so; xxxnewlinexxx Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme; xxxnewlinexxx A bliss in proof,-- and prov'd, a very woe; xxxnewlinexxx Before, a joy propos'd; behind a dream. xxxnewlinexxx   All this the world well knows; yet none knows well xxxnewlinexxx   To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell. xxxendxxx
My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun; xxxnewlinexxx Coral is far more red, than her lips red: xxxnewlinexxx If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun; xxxnewlinexxx If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head. xxxnewlinexxx I have seen roses damask'd, red and white, xxxnewlinexxx But no such roses see I in her cheeks; xxxnewlinexxx And in some perfumes is there more delight xxxnewlinexxx Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks. xxxnewlinexxx I love to hear her speak, yet well I know xxxnewlinexxx That music hath a far more pleasing sound: xxxnewlinexxx I grant I never saw a goddess go,-- xxxnewlinexxx My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground: xxxnewlinexxx   And yet by heaven, I think my love as rare, xxxnewlinexxx   As any she belied with false compare. xxxendxxx
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,  xxxnewlinexxx As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel; xxxnewlinexxx For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart xxxnewlinexxx Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel. xxxnewlinexxx Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold, xxxnewlinexxx Thy face hath not the power to make love groan; xxxnewlinexxx To say they err I dare not be so bold, xxxnewlinexxx Although I swear it to myself alone. xxxnewlinexxx And to be sure that is not false I swear, xxxnewlinexxx A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face, xxxnewlinexxx One on another's neck, do witness bear xxxnewlinexxx Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place. xxxnewlinexxx   In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds, xxxnewlinexxx   And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds. xxxendxxx
Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me, xxxnewlinexxx Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain, xxxnewlinexxx Have put on black and loving mourners be, xxxnewlinexxx Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain. xxxnewlinexxx And truly not the morning sun of heaven  xxxnewlinexxx Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east, xxxnewlinexxx Nor that full star that ushers in the even, xxxnewlinexxx Doth half that glory to the sober west, xxxnewlinexxx As those two mourning eyes become thy face: xxxnewlinexxx O! let it then as well beseem thy heart xxxnewlinexxx To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace, xxxnewlinexxx And suit thy pity like in every part. xxxnewlinexxx   Then will I swear beauty herself is black, xxxnewlinexxx   And all they foul that thy complexion lack. xxxendxxx
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan xxxnewlinexxx For that deep wound it gives my friend and me! xxxnewlinexxx Is't not enough to torture me alone, xxxnewlinexxx But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be? xxxnewlinexxx Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken, xxxnewlinexxx And my next self thou harder hast engross'd: xxxnewlinexxx Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken; xxxnewlinexxx A torment thrice three-fold thus to be cross'd: xxxnewlinexxx Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,  xxxnewlinexxx But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail; xxxnewlinexxx Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard; xxxnewlinexxx Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail: xxxnewlinexxx   And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee, xxxnewlinexxx   Perforce am thine, and all that is in me. xxxendxxx
So, now I have confess'd that he is thine, xxxnewlinexxx And I my self am mortgag'd to thy will, xxxnewlinexxx Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine xxxnewlinexxx Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still: xxxnewlinexxx But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free, xxxnewlinexxx For thou art covetous, and he is kind; xxxnewlinexxx He learn'd but surety-like to write for me, xxxnewlinexxx Under that bond that him as fast doth bind. xxxnewlinexxx The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take, xxxnewlinexxx Thou usurer, that putt'st forth all to use, xxxnewlinexxx And sue a friend came debtor for my sake; xxxnewlinexxx So him I lose through my unkind abuse. xxxnewlinexxx   Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me: xxxnewlinexxx   He pays the whole, and yet am I not free. xxxendxxx
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,' xxxnewlinexxx And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in over-plus; xxxnewlinexxx More than enough am I that vex'd thee still, xxxnewlinexxx To thy sweet will making addition thus. xxxnewlinexxx Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious, xxxnewlinexxx Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine? xxxnewlinexxx Shall will in others seem right gracious, xxxnewlinexxx And in my will no fair acceptance shine? xxxnewlinexxx The sea, all water, yet receives rain still, xxxnewlinexxx And in abundance addeth to his store; xxxnewlinexxx So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will' xxxnewlinexxx One will of mine, to make thy large will more. xxxnewlinexxx   Let no unkind 'No' fair beseechers kill; xxxnewlinexxx   Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.' xxxendxxx
If thy soul check thee that I come so near,  xxxnewlinexxx Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will', xxxnewlinexxx And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there; xxxnewlinexxx Thus far for love, my love-suit, sweet, fulfil. xxxnewlinexxx 'Will', will fulfil the treasure of thy love, xxxnewlinexxx Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one. xxxnewlinexxx In things of great receipt with ease we prove xxxnewlinexxx Among a number one is reckon'd none: xxxnewlinexxx Then in the number let me pass untold, xxxnewlinexxx Though in thy store's account I one must be; xxxnewlinexxx For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold xxxnewlinexxx That nothing me, a something sweet to thee: xxxnewlinexxx   Make but my name thy love, and love that still, xxxnewlinexxx   And then thou lov'st me for my name is 'Will.' xxxendxxx
Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes, xxxnewlinexxx That they behold, and see not what they see? xxxnewlinexxx They know what beauty is, see where it lies, xxxnewlinexxx Yet what the best is take the worst to be. xxxnewlinexxx If eyes, corrupt by over-partial looks,  xxxnewlinexxx Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride, xxxnewlinexxx Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks, xxxnewlinexxx Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied? xxxnewlinexxx Why should my heart think that a several plot, xxxnewlinexxx Which my heart knows the wide world's common place? xxxnewlinexxx Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not, xxxnewlinexxx To put fair truth upon so foul a face? xxxnewlinexxx   In things right true my heart and eyes have err'd, xxxnewlinexxx   And to this false plague are they now transferr'd. xxxendxxx
When my love swears that she is made of truth, xxxnewlinexxx I do believe her though I know she lies, xxxnewlinexxx That she might think me some untutor'd youth, xxxnewlinexxx Unlearned in the world's false subtleties. xxxnewlinexxx Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young, xxxnewlinexxx Although she knows my days are past the best, xxxnewlinexxx Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue: xxxnewlinexxx On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed: xxxnewlinexxx But wherefore says she not she is unjust?  xxxnewlinexxx And wherefore say not I that I am old? xxxnewlinexxx O! love's best habit is in seeming trust, xxxnewlinexxx And age in love, loves not to have years told: xxxnewlinexxx   Therefore I lie with her, and she with me, xxxnewlinexxx   And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be. xxxendxxx
O! call not me to justify the wrong xxxnewlinexxx That thy unkindness lays upon my heart; xxxnewlinexxx Wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue: xxxnewlinexxx Use power with power, and slay me not by art, xxxnewlinexxx Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight, xxxnewlinexxx Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside: xxxnewlinexxx What need'st thou wound with cunning, when thy might xxxnewlinexxx Is more than my o'erpress'd defence can bide? xxxnewlinexxx Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows xxxnewlinexxx Her pretty looks have been mine enemies; xxxnewlinexxx And therefore from my face she turns my foes, xxxnewlinexxx That they elsewhere might dart their injuries: xxxnewlinexxx   Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,  xxxnewlinexxx   Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain. xxxnewlinexxx  xxxendxxx
Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press xxxnewlinexxx My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain; xxxnewlinexxx Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express xxxnewlinexxx The manner of my pity-wanting pain. xxxnewlinexxx If I might teach thee wit, better it were, xxxnewlinexxx Though not to love, yet, love to tell me so;-- xxxnewlinexxx As testy sick men, when their deaths be near, xxxnewlinexxx No news but health from their physicians know;-- xxxnewlinexxx For, if I should despair, I should grow mad, xxxnewlinexxx And in my madness might speak ill of thee; xxxnewlinexxx Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad, xxxnewlinexxx Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be. xxxnewlinexxx   That I may not be so, nor thou belied, xxxnewlinexxx   Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide. xxxendxxx
In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,  xxxnewlinexxx For they in thee a thousand errors note; xxxnewlinexxx But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise, xxxnewlinexxx Who, in despite of view, is pleased to dote. xxxnewlinexxx Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted; xxxnewlinexxx Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone, xxxnewlinexxx Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited xxxnewlinexxx To any sensual feast with thee alone: xxxnewlinexxx But my five wits nor my five senses can xxxnewlinexxx Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee, xxxnewlinexxx Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man, xxxnewlinexxx Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be: xxxnewlinexxx   Only my plague thus far I count my gain, xxxnewlinexxx   That she that makes me sin awards me pain. xxxendxxx
Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate, xxxnewlinexxx Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving: xxxnewlinexxx O! but with mine compare thou thine own state, xxxnewlinexxx And thou shalt find it merits not reproving; xxxnewlinexxx Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,  xxxnewlinexxx That have profan'd their scarlet ornaments xxxnewlinexxx And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine, xxxnewlinexxx Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents. xxxnewlinexxx Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lov'st those xxxnewlinexxx Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee: xxxnewlinexxx Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows, xxxnewlinexxx Thy pity may deserve to pitied be. xxxnewlinexxx   If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide, xxxnewlinexxx   By self-example mayst thou be denied! xxxendxxx
Lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch xxxnewlinexxx One of her feather'd creatures broke away, xxxnewlinexxx Sets down her babe, and makes all swift dispatch xxxnewlinexxx In pursuit of the thing she would have stay; xxxnewlinexxx Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase, xxxnewlinexxx Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent xxxnewlinexxx To follow that which flies before her face, xxxnewlinexxx Not prizing her poor infant's discontent; xxxnewlinexxx So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee,  xxxnewlinexxx Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind; xxxnewlinexxx But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me, xxxnewlinexxx And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind; xxxnewlinexxx   So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,' xxxnewlinexxx   If thou turn back and my loud crying still. xxxendxxx
Two loves I have of comfort and despair, xxxnewlinexxx Which like two spirits do suggest me still: xxxnewlinexxx The better angel is a man right fair, xxxnewlinexxx The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill. xxxnewlinexxx To win me soon to hell, my female evil, xxxnewlinexxx Tempteth my better angel from my side, xxxnewlinexxx And would corrupt my saint to be a devil, xxxnewlinexxx Wooing his purity with her foul pride. xxxnewlinexxx And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend, xxxnewlinexxx Suspect I may, yet not directly tell; xxxnewlinexxx But being both from me, both to each friend, xxxnewlinexxx I guess one angel in another's hell: xxxnewlinexxx   Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,  xxxnewlinexxx   Till my bad angel fire my good one out. xxxendxxx
Those lips that Love's own hand did make, xxxnewlinexxx Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate', xxxnewlinexxx To me that languish'd for her sake: xxxnewlinexxx But when she saw my woeful state, xxxnewlinexxx Straight in her heart did mercy come, xxxnewlinexxx Chiding that tongue that ever sweet xxxnewlinexxx Was us'd in giving gentle doom; xxxnewlinexxx And taught it thus anew to greet; xxxnewlinexxx 'I hate' she alter'd with an end, xxxnewlinexxx That followed it as gentle day, xxxnewlinexxx Doth follow night, who like a fiend xxxnewlinexxx From heaven to hell is flown away. xxxnewlinexxx   'I hate', from hate away she threw, xxxnewlinexxx   And sav'd my life, saying 'not you'. xxxendxxx
Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,  xxxnewlinexxx My sinful earth these rebel powers array, xxxnewlinexxx Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, xxxnewlinexxx Painting thy outward walls so costly gay? xxxnewlinexxx Why so large cost, having so short a lease, xxxnewlinexxx Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? xxxnewlinexxx Shall worms, inheritors of this excess, xxxnewlinexxx Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end? xxxnewlinexxx Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss, xxxnewlinexxx And let that pine to aggravate thy store; xxxnewlinexxx Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; xxxnewlinexxx Within be fed, without be rich no more: xxxnewlinexxx   So shall thou feed on Death, that feeds on men, xxxnewlinexxx   And Death once dead, there's no more dying then. xxxendxxx
My love is as a fever longing still, xxxnewlinexxx For that which longer nurseth the disease; xxxnewlinexxx Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill, xxxnewlinexxx The uncertain sickly appetite to please. xxxnewlinexxx My reason, the physician to my love,  xxxnewlinexxx Angry that his prescriptions are not kept, xxxnewlinexxx Hath left me, and I desperate now approve xxxnewlinexxx Desire is death, which physic did except. xxxnewlinexxx Past cure I am, now Reason is past care, xxxnewlinexxx And frantic-mad with evermore unrest; xxxnewlinexxx My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are, xxxnewlinexxx At random from the truth vainly express'd; xxxnewlinexxx   For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright, xxxnewlinexxx   Who art as black as hell, as dark as night. xxxendxxx
O me! what eyes hath Love put in my head, xxxnewlinexxx Which have no correspondence with true sight; xxxnewlinexxx Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled, xxxnewlinexxx That censures falsely what they see aright? xxxnewlinexxx If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote, xxxnewlinexxx What means the world to say it is not so? xxxnewlinexxx If it be not, then love doth well denote xxxnewlinexxx Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no, xxxnewlinexxx How can it? O! how can Love's eye be true,  xxxnewlinexxx That is so vexed with watching and with tears? xxxnewlinexxx No marvel then, though I mistake my view; xxxnewlinexxx The sun itself sees not, till heaven clears. xxxnewlinexxx   O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind, xxxnewlinexxx   Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find. xxxendxxx
Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not, xxxnewlinexxx When I against myself with thee partake? xxxnewlinexxx Do I not think on thee, when I forgot xxxnewlinexxx Am of my self, all tyrant, for thy sake? xxxnewlinexxx Who hateth thee that I do call my friend, xxxnewlinexxx On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon, xxxnewlinexxx Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend xxxnewlinexxx Revenge upon myself with present moan? xxxnewlinexxx What merit do I in my self respect, xxxnewlinexxx That is so proud thy service to despise, xxxnewlinexxx When all my best doth worship thy defect, xxxnewlinexxx Commanded by the motion of thine eyes? xxxnewlinexxx   But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind,; xxxnewlinexxx   Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind. xxxendxxx
O! from what power hast thou this powerful might, xxxnewlinexxx With insufficiency my heart to sway? xxxnewlinexxx To make me give the lie to my true sight, xxxnewlinexxx And swear that brightness doth not grace the day? xxxnewlinexxx Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill, xxxnewlinexxx That in the very refuse of thy deeds xxxnewlinexxx There is such strength and warrantise of skill, xxxnewlinexxx That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds? xxxnewlinexxx Who taught thee how to make me love thee more, xxxnewlinexxx The more I hear and see just cause of hate? xxxnewlinexxx O! though I love what others do abhor, xxxnewlinexxx With others thou shouldst not abhor my state: xxxnewlinexxx   If thy unworthiness rais'd love in me, xxxnewlinexxx   More worthy I to be belov'd of thee. xxxendxxx
Love is too young to know what conscience is,  xxxnewlinexxx Yet who knows not conscience is born of love? xxxnewlinexxx Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss, xxxnewlinexxx Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove: xxxnewlinexxx For, thou betraying me, I do betray xxxnewlinexxx My nobler part to my gross body's treason; xxxnewlinexxx My soul doth tell my body that he may xxxnewlinexxx Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason, xxxnewlinexxx But rising at thy name doth point out thee, xxxnewlinexxx As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride, xxxnewlinexxx He is contented thy poor drudge to be, xxxnewlinexxx To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side. xxxnewlinexxx   No want of conscience hold it that I call xxxnewlinexxx   Her 'love,' for whose dear love I rise and fall. xxxendxxx
In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn, xxxnewlinexxx But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing; xxxnewlinexxx In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn, xxxnewlinexxx In vowing new hate after new love bearing: xxxnewlinexxx But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,  xxxnewlinexxx When I break twenty? I am perjur'd most; xxxnewlinexxx For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee, xxxnewlinexxx And all my honest faith in thee is lost: xxxnewlinexxx For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness, xxxnewlinexxx Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy; xxxnewlinexxx And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness, xxxnewlinexxx Or made them swear against the thing they see; xxxnewlinexxx   For I have sworn thee fair; more perjur'd I, xxxnewlinexxx   To swear against the truth so foul a lie.! xxxendxxx
Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep: xxxnewlinexxx A maid of Dian's this advantage found, xxxnewlinexxx And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep xxxnewlinexxx In a cold valley-fountain of that ground; xxxnewlinexxx Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love, xxxnewlinexxx A dateless lively heat, still to endure, xxxnewlinexxx And grew a seeting bath, which yet men prove xxxnewlinexxx Against strange maladies a sovereign cure. xxxnewlinexxx But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,  xxxnewlinexxx The boy for trial needs would touch my breast; xxxnewlinexxx I, sick withal, the help of bath desired, xxxnewlinexxx And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest, xxxnewlinexxx   But found no cure, the bath for my help lies xxxnewlinexxx   Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes. xxxendxxx
The little Love-god lying once asleep, xxxnewlinexxx Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand, xxxnewlinexxx Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep xxxnewlinexxx Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand xxxnewlinexxx The fairest votary took up that fire xxxnewlinexxx Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd; xxxnewlinexxx And so the general of hot desire xxxnewlinexxx Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarm'd. xxxnewlinexxx This brand she quenched in a cool well by, xxxnewlinexxx Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual, xxxnewlinexxx Growing a bath and healthful remedy, xxxnewlinexxx For men diseas'd; but I, my mistress' thrall, xxxnewlinexxx   Came there for cure and this by that I prove,  xxxnewlinexxx   Love's fire heats water, water cools not love. xxxnewlinexxx  xxxnewlinexxx 